BALLATA I.

_Lassare il velo o per sole o per ombra._

PERCEIVING HIS PASSION, LAURA'S SEVERITY INCREASES.


      Never thy veil, in sun or in the shade,
    Lady, a moment I have seen
    Quitted, since of my heart the queen
    Mine eyes confessing thee my heart betray'd
    While my enamour'd thoughts I kept conceal'd.
    Those fond vain hopes by which I die,
    In thy sweet features kindness beam'd:
    Changed was the gentle language of thine eye
    Soon as my foolish heart itself reveal'd;
    And all that mildness which I changeless deem'd--
    All, all withdrawn which most my soul esteem'd.
    Yet still the veil I must obey,
    Which, whatsoe'er the aspect of the day,
    Thine eyes' fair radiance hides, my life to overshade.

    CAPEL LOFFT.


      Wherefore, my unkind fair one, say,
    Whether the sun fierce darts his ray,
    Or whether gloom o'erspreads the sky,
    That envious veil is ne'er thrown by;
    Though well you read my heart, and knew
    How much I long'd your charms to view?
    While I conceal'd each tender thought,
    That my fond mind's destruction wrought,
    Your face with pity sweetly shone;
    But, when love made my passion known,
    Your sunny locks were seen no more,
    Nor smiled your eyes as heretofore;
    Behind a jealous cloud retired
    Those beauties which I most admired.
    And shall a veil thus rule my fate?
    O cruel veil, that whether heat
    Or cold be felt, art doom'd to prove
    Fatal to me, shadowing the lights I love!

    NOTT.




SONNET XI.

_Se la mia vita dall' aspro tormento._

HE HOPES THAT TIME WILL RENDER HER MORE MERCIFUL.


      If o'er each bitter pang, each hidden throe
    Sadly triumphant I my years drag on,
    Till even the radiance of those eyes is gone,
    Lady, which star-like now illume thy brow;
    And silver'd are those locks of golden glow,
    And wreaths and robes of green aside are thrown,
    And from thy cheek those hues of beauty flown,
    Which check'd so long the utterance of my woe,
    Haply my bolder tongue may then reveal
    The bosom'd annals of my heart's fierce fire,
    The martyr-throbs that now in night I veil:
    And should the chill Time frown on young Desire.
    Still, still some late remorse that breast may feel,
    And heave a tardy sigh--ere love with life expire.

    WRANGHAM.


      Lady, if grace to me so long be lent
    From love's sharp tyranny and trials keen,
    Ere my last days, in life's far vale, are seen,
    To know of thy bright eyes the lustre spent,
    The fine gold of thy hair with silver sprent,
    Neglected the gay wreaths and robes of green,
    Pale, too, and thin the face which made me, e'en
    'Gainst injury, slow and timid to lament:
    Then will I, for such boldness love would give,
    Lay bare my secret heart, in martyr's fire
    Years, days, and hours that yet has known to live;
    And, though the time then suit not fair desire,
    At least there may arrive to my long grief,
    Too late of tender sighs the poor relief.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XII.

_Quando fra l' altre donne ad ora ad ora._

THE BEAUTY OF LAURA LEADS HIM TO THE CONTEMPLATION OF THE SUPREME GOOD.


      Throned on her angel brow, when Love displays
    His radiant form among all other fair,
    Far as eclipsed their choicest charms appear,
    I feel beyond its wont my passion blaze.
    And still I bless the day, the hour, the place,
    When first so high mine eyes I dared to rear;
    And say, "Fond heart, thy gratitude declare,
    That then thou had'st the privilege to gaze.
    'Twas she inspired the tender thought of love,
    Which points to heaven, and teaches to despise
    The earthly vanities that others prize:
    She gave the soul's light grace, which to the skies
    Bids thee straight onward in the right path move;
    Whence buoy'd by hope e'en, now I soar to worlds above."

    WRANGHAM.


      When Love, whose proper throne is that sweet face,
    At times escorts her 'mid the sisters fair,
    As their each beauty is than hers less rare,
    So swells in me the fond desire apace.
    I bless the hour, the season and the place,
    So high and heavenward when my eyes could dare;
    And say: "My heart! in grateful memory bear
    This lofty honour and surpassing grace:
    From her descends the tender truthful thought,
    Which follow'd, bliss supreme shall thee repay,
    Who spurn'st the vanities that win the crowd:
    From her that gentle graceful love is caught,
    To heaven which leads thee by the right-hand way,
    And crowns e'en here with hopes both pure and proud."

    MACGREGOR.




BALLATA II.

_Occhi miei lassi, mentre ch' io vi giro._

HE INVITES HIS EYES TO FEAST THEMSELVES ON LAURA.


      My wearied eyes! while looking thus
    On that fair fatal face to us,
    Be wise, be brief, for--hence my sighs--
    Already Love our bliss denies.
    Death only can the amorous track
    Shut from my thoughts which leads them back
    To the sweet port of all their weal;
    But lesser objects may conceal
    Our light from you, that meaner far
    In virtue and perfection are.
    Wherefore, poor eyes! ere yet appears,
    Already nigh, the time of tears,
    Now, after long privation past,
    Look, and some comfort take at last.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XIII.

_Io mi rivolgo indietro a ciascun passo._

ON QUITTING LAURA.


      With weary frame which painfully I bear,
    I look behind me at each onward pace,
    And then take comfort from your native air,
    Which following fans my melancholy face;
    The far way, my frail life, the cherish'd fair
    Whom thus I leave, as then my thoughts retrace,
    I fix my feet in silent pale despair,
    And on the earth my tearful eyes abase.
    At times a doubt, too, rises on my woes,
    "How ever can this weak and wasted frame
    Live from life's spirit and one source afar?"
    Love's answer soon the truth forgotten shows--
    "This high pure privilege true lovers claim,
    Who from mere human feelings franchised are!"

    MACGREGOR.


      I look behind each step I onward trace,
    Scarce able to support my wearied frame,
    Ah, wretched me! I pantingly exclaim,
    And from her atmosphere new strength embrace;
    I think on her I leave--my heart's best grace--
    My lengthen'd journey--life's capricious flame--
    I pause in withering fear, with purpose tame,
    Whilst down my cheek tears quick each other chase.
    My doubting heart thus questions in my grief:
    "Whence comes it that existence thou canst know
    When from thy spirit thou dost dwell entire?"
    Love, holy Love, my heart then answers brief:
    "Such privilege I do on all bestow
    Who feed my flame with nought of earthly fire!"

    WOLLASTON.




SONNET XIV.

_Movesi 'l vecchierel canuto e bianco._

HE COMPARES HIMSELF TO A PILGRIM.


      The palmer bent, with locks of silver gray,
    Quits the sweet spot where he has pass'd his years,
    Quits his poor family, whose anxious fears
    Paint the loved father fainting on his way;
    And trembling, on his aged limbs slow borne,
    In these last days that close his earthly course,
    He, in his soul's strong purpose, finds new force,
    Though weak with age, though by long travel worn:
    Thus reaching Rome, led on by pious love,
    He seeks the image of that Saviour Lord
    Whom soon he hopes to meet in bliss above:
    So, oft in other forms I seek to trace
    Some charm, that to my heart may yet afford
    A faint resemblance of thy matchless grace.

    DACRE.


      As parts the aged pilgrim, worn and gray,
    From the dear spot his life where he had spent,
    From his poor family by sorrow rent,
    Whose love still fears him fainting in decay:
    Thence dragging heavily, in life's last day,
    His suffering frame, on pious journey bent,
    Pricking with earnest prayers his good intent,
    Though bow'd with years, and weary with the way,
    He reaches Rome, still following his desire
    The likeness of his Lord on earth to see,
    Whom yet he hopes in heaven above to meet;
    So I, too, seek, nor in the fond quest tire,
    Lady, in other fair if aught there be
    That faintly may recall thy beauties sweet.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XV.

_Piovonmi amare lagrime dal viso._

HIS STATE WHEN LAURA IS PRESENT, AND WHEN SHE DEPARTS.


      Down my cheeks bitter tears incessant rain,
    And my heart struggles with convulsive sighs,
    When, Laura, upon you I turn my eyes,
    For whom the world's allurements I disdain,
    But when I see that gentle smile again,
    That modest, sweet, and tender smile, arise,
    It pours on every sense a blest surprise;
    Lost in delight is all my torturing pain.
    Too soon this heavenly transport sinks and dies:
    When all thy soothing charms my fate removes
    At thy departure from my ravish'd view.
    To that sole refuge its firm faith approves
    My spirit from my ravish'd bosom flies,
    And wing'd with fond remembrance follows you.

    CAPEL LOFFT.


      Tears, bitter tears adown my pale cheek rain,
    Bursts from mine anguish'd breast a storm of sighs,
    Whene'er on you I turn my passionate eyes,
    For whom alone this bright world I disdain.
    True! to my ardent wishes and old pain
    That mild sweet smile a peaceful balm supplies,
    Rescues me from the martyr fire that tries,
    Rapt and intent on you whilst I remain;
    Thus in your presence--but my spirits freeze
    When, ushering with fond acts a warm adieu,
    My fatal stars from life's quench'd heaven decay.
    My soul released at last with Love's apt keys
    But issues from my heart to follow you,
    Nor tears itself without much thought away.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XVI.

_Quand' io son tutto volto in quella parte._

HE FLIES, BUT PASSION PURSUES HIM.


      When I reflect and turn me to that part
    Whence my sweet lady beam'd in purest light,
    And in my inmost thought remains that light
    Which burns me and consumes in every part,
    I, who yet dread lest from my heart it part
    And see at hand the end of this my light,
    Go lonely, like a man deprived of light,
    Ignorant where to go; whence to depart.
    Thus flee I from the stroke which lays me dead,
    Yet flee not with such speed but that desire
    Follows, companion of my flight alone.
    Silent I go:--but these my words, though dead,
    Others would cause to weep--this I desire,
    That I may weep and waste myself alone.

    CAPEL LOFFT.


      When all my mind I turn to the one part
    Where sheds my lady's face its beauteous light,
    And lingers in my loving thought the light
    That burns and racks within me ev'ry part,
    I from my heart who fear that it may part,
    And see the near end of my single light,
    Go, as a blind man, groping without light,
    Who knows not where yet presses to depart.
    Thus from the blows which ever wish me dead
    I flee, but not so swiftly that desire
    Ceases to come, as is its wont, with me.
    Silent I move: for accents of the dead
    Would melt the general age: and I desire
    That sighs and tears should only fall from me.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XVII.

_Son animali al mondo di sì altera._

HE COMPARES HIMSELF TO A MOTH.


      Creatures there are in life of such keen sight
    That no defence they need from noonday sun,
    And others dazzled by excess of light
    Who issue not abroad till day is done,
    And, with weak fondness, some because 'tis bright,
    Who in the death-flame for enjoyment run,
    Thus proving theirs a different virtue quite--
    Alas! of this last kind myself am one;
    For, of this fair the splendour to regard,
    I am but weak and ill--against late hours
    And darkness gath'ring round--myself to ward.
    Wherefore, with tearful eyes of failing powers,
    My destiny condemns me still to turn
    Where following faster I but fiercer burn.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XVIII.

_Vergognando talor ch' ancor si taccia._

THE PRAISES OF LAURA TRANSCEND HIS POETIC POWERS.


      Ashamed sometimes thy beauties should remain
    As yet unsung, sweet lady, in my rhyme;
    When first I saw thee I recall the time,
    Pleasing as none shall ever please again.
    But no fit polish can my verse attain,
    Not mine is strength to try the task sublime:
    My genius, measuring its power to climb,
    From such attempt doth prudently refrain.
    Full oft I oped my lips to chant thy name;
    Then in mid utterance the lay was lost:
    But say what muse can dare so bold a flight?
    Full oft I strove in measure to indite;
    But ah, the pen, the hand, the vein I boast,
    At once were vanquish'd by the mighty theme!

    NOTT.


      Ashamed at times that I am silent, yet,
    Lady, though your rare beauties prompt my rhyme,
    When first I saw thee I recall the time
    Such as again no other can be met.
    But, with such burthen on my shoulders set.
    My mind, its frailty feeling, cannot climb,
    And shrinks alike from polish'd and sublime,
    While my vain utterance frozen terrors let.
    Often already have I sought to sing,
    But midway in my breast the voice was stay'd,
    For ah! so high what praise may ever spring?
    And oft have I the tender verse essay'd,
    But still in vain; pen, hand, and intellect
    In the first effort conquer'd are and check'd.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XIX.

_Mille fiate, o dolce mia guerrera._

HIS HEART, REJECTED BY LAURA, WILL PERISH, UNLESS SHE RELENT.


      A thousand times, sweet warrior, have I tried,
    Proffering my heart to thee, some peace to gain
    From those bright eyes, but still, alas! in vain,
    To such low level stoops not thy chaste pride.
    If others seek the love thus thrown aside,
    Vain were their hopes and labours to obtain;
    The heart thou spurnest I alike disdain,
    To thee displeasing, 'tis by me denied.
    But if, discarded thus, it find not thee
    Its joyless exile willing to befriend,
    Alone, untaught at others' will to wend,
    Soon from life's weary burden will it flee.
    How heavy then the guilt to both, but more
    To thee, for thee it did the most adore.

    MACGREGOR.


      A thousand times, sweet warrior, to obtain
    Peace with those beauteous eyes I've vainly tried,
    Proffering my heart; but with that lofty pride
    To bend your looks so lowly you refrain:
    Expects a stranger fair that heart to gain,
    In frail, fallacious hopes will she confide:
    It never more to me can be allied;
    Since what you scorn, dear lady, I disdain.
    In its sad exile if no aid you lend
    Banish'd by me; and it can neither stay
    Alone, nor yet another's call obey;
    Its vital course must hasten to its end:
    Ah me, how guilty then we both should prove,
    But guilty you the most, for you it most doth love.

    NOTT.




SESTINA I.

_A qualunque animale alberga in terra._

NIGHT BRINGS HIM NO REST. HE IS THE PREY OF DESPAIR.


      To every animal that dwells on earth,
    Except to those which have in hate the sun,
    Their time of labour is while lasts the day;
    But when high heaven relumes its thousand stars,
    This seeks his hut, and that its native wood,
    Each finds repose, at least until the dawn.

    But I, when fresh and fair begins the dawn
    To chase the lingering shades that cloak'd the earth,
    Wakening the animals in every wood,
    No truce to sorrow find while rolls the sun;
    And, when again I see the glistening stars,
    Still wander, weeping, wishing for the day.

    When sober evening chases the bright day,
    And this our darkness makes for others dawn,
    Pensive I look upon the cruel stars
    Which framed me of such pliant passionate earth,
    And curse the day that e'er I saw the sun,
    Which makes me native seem of wildest wood.

    And yet methinks was ne'er in any wood,
    So wild a denizen, by night or day,
    As she whom thus I blame in shade and sun:
    Me night's first sleep o'ercomes not, nor the dawn,
    For though in mortal coil I tread the earth,
    My firm and fond desire is from the stars.

    Ere up to you I turn, O lustrous stars,
    Or downwards in love's labyrinthine wood,
    Leaving my fleshly frame in mouldering earth,
    Could I but pity find in her, one day
    Would many years redeem, and to the dawn
    With bliss enrich me from the setting sun!

    Oh! might I be with her where sinks the sun,
    No other eyes upon us but the stars,
    Alone, one sweet night, ended by no dawn,
    Nor she again transfigured in green wood,
    To cheat my clasping arms, as on the day,
    When Phoebus vainly follow'd her on earth.

    I shall lie low in earth, in crumbling wood.
    And clustering stars shall gem the noon of day,
    Ere on so sweet a dawn shall rise that sun.

    MACGREGOR.


      Each creature on whose wakeful eyes
    The bright sun pours his golden fire,
    By day a destined toil pursues;
    And, when heaven's lamps illume the skies,
    All to some haunt for rest retire,
    Till a fresh dawn that toil renews.
    But I, when a new morn doth rise,
    Chasing from earth its murky shades,
    While ring the forests with delight,
    Find no remission of my sighs;
    And, soon as night her mantle spreads,
    I weep, and wish returning light
    Again when eve bids day retreat,
    O'er other climes to dart its rays;
    Pensive those cruel stars I view,
    Which influence thus my amorous fate;
    And imprecate that beauty's blaze,
    Which o'er my form such wildness threw.
    No forest surely in its glooms
    Nurtures a savage so unkind
    As she who bids these sorrows flow:
    Me, nor the dawn nor sleep o'ercomes;
    For, though of mortal mould, my mind
    Feels more than passion's mortal glow.
    Ere up to you, bright orbs, I fly,
    Or to Love's bower speed down my way,
    While here my mouldering limbs remain;
    Let me her pity once espy;
    Thus, rich in bliss, one little day
    Shall recompense whole years of pain.
    Be Laura mine at set of sun;
    Let heaven's fires only mark our loves,
    And the day ne'er its light renew;
    My fond embrace may she not shun;
    Nor Phoebus-like, through laurel groves,
    May I a nymph transform'd pursue!
    But I shall cast this mortal veil on earth,
    And stars shall gild the noon, ere such bright scenes have birth.

    NOTT.




CANZONE I.

_Nel dolce tempo della prima etade._

HIS SUFFERINGS SINCE HE BECAME THE SLAVE OF LOVE.


      In the sweet season when my life was new,
    Which saw the birth, and still the being sees
    Of the fierce passion for my ill that grew,
    Fain would I sing--my sorrow to appease--
    How then I lived, in liberty, at ease,
    While o'er my heart held slighted Love no sway;
    And how, at length, by too high scorn, for aye,
    I sank his slave, and what befell me then,
    Whereby to all a warning I remain;
    Although my sharpest pain
    Be elsewhere written, so that many a pen
    Is tired already, and, in every vale,
    The echo of my heavy sighs is rife,
    Some credence forcing of my anguish'd life;
    And, as her wont, if here my memory fail,
    Be my long martyrdom its saving plea,
    And the one thought which so its torment made,
    As every feeling else to throw in shade,
    And make me of myself forgetful be--
    Ruling life's inmost core, its bare rind left for me.

    Long years and many had pass'd o'er my head,
    Since, in Love's first assault, was dealt my wound,
    And from my brow its youthful air had fled,
    While cold and cautious thoughts my heart around
    Had made it almost adamantine ground,
    To loosen which hard passion gave no rest:
    No sorrow yet with tears had bathed my breast,
    Nor broke my sleep: and what was not in mine
    A miracle to me in others seem'd.
    Life's sure test death is deem'd,
    As cloudless eve best proves the past day fine;
    Ah me! the tyrant whom I sing, descried
    Ere long his error, that, till then, his dart
    Not yet beneath the gown had pierced my heart,
    And brought a puissant lady as his guide,
    'Gainst whom of small or no avail has been
    Genius, or force, to strive or supplicate.
    These two transform'd me to my present state,
    Making of breathing man a laurel green,
    Which loses not its leaves though wintry blasts be keen.

    What my amaze, when first I fully learn'd
    The wondrous change upon my person done,
    And saw my thin hairs to those green leaves turn'd
    (Whence yet for them a crown I might have won);
    My feet wherewith I stood, and moved, and run--
    Thus to the soul the subject members bow--
    Become two roots upon the shore, not now
    Of fabled Peneus, but a stream as proud,
    And stiffen'd to a branch my either arm!
    Nor less was my alarm,
    When next my frame white down was seen to shroud,
    While, 'neath the deadly leven, shatter'd lay
    My first green hope that soar'd, too proud, in air,
    Because, in sooth, I knew not when nor where
    I left my latter state; but, night and day,
    Where it was struck, alone, in tears, I went,
    Still seeking it alwhere, and in the wave;
    And, for its fatal fall, while able, gave
    My tongue no respite from its one lament,
    For the sad snowy swan both form and language lent.

    Thus that loved wave--my mortal speech put by
    For birdlike song--I track'd with constant feet,
    Still asking mercy with a stranger cry;
    But ne'er in tones so tender, nor so sweet,
    Knew I my amorous sorrow to repeat,
    As might her hard and cruel bosom melt:
    Judge, still if memory sting, what then I felt!
    But ah! not now the past, it rather needs
    Of her my lovely and inveterate foe
    The present power to show,
    Though such she be all language as exceeds.
    She with a glance who rules us as her own,
    Opening my breast my heart in hand to take,
    Thus said to me: "Of this no mention make."
    I saw her then, in alter'd air, alone,
    So that I recognised her not--O shame
    Be on my truant mind and faithless sight!
    And when the truth I told her in sore fright,
    She soon resumed her old accustom'd frame,
    While, desperate and half dead, a hard rock mine became.

    As spoke she, o'er her mien such feeling stirr'd,
    That from the solid rock, with lively fear,
    "Haply I am not what you deem," I heard;
    And then methought, "If she but help me here,
    No life can ever weary be, or drear;
    To make me weep, return, my banish'd Lord!"
    I know not how, but thence, the power restored,
    Blaming no other than myself, I went,
    And, nor alive, nor dead, the long day past.
    But, because time flies fast,
    And the pen answers ill my good intent,
    Full many a thing long written in my mind
    I here omit; and only mention such
    Whereat who hears them now will marvel much.
    Death so his hand around my vitals twined,
    Not silence from its grasp my heart could save,
    Or succour to its outraged virtue bring:
    As speech to me was a forbidden thing,
    To paper and to ink my griefs I gave--
    Life, not my own, is lost through you who dig my grave.

    I fondly thought before her eyes, at length,
    Though low and lost, some mercy to obtain;
    And this the hope which lent my spirit strength.
    Sometimes humility o'ercomes disdain,
    Sometimes inflames it to worse spite again;
    This knew I, who so long was left in night,
    That from such prayers had disappear'd my light;
    Till I, who sought her still, nor found, alas!
    Even her shade, nor of her feet a sign,
    Outwearied and supine,
    As one who midway sleeps, upon the grass
    Threw me, and there, accusing the brief ray,
    Of bitter tears I loosed the prison'd flood,
    To flow and fall, to them as seem'd it good.
    Ne'er vanish'd snow before the sun away,
    As then to melt apace it me befell,
    Till, 'neath a spreading beech a fountain swell'd;
    Long in that change my humid course I held,--
    Who ever saw from Man a true fount well?
    And yet, though strange it sound, things known and sure I tell.

    The soul from God its nobler nature gains
    (For none save He such favour could bestow)
    And like our Maker its high state retains,
    To pardon who is never tired, nor slow,
    If but with humble heart and suppliant show,
    For mercy for past sins to Him we bend;
    And if, against his wont, He seem to lend,
    Awhile, a cold ear to our earnest prayers,
    'Tis that right fear the sinner more may fill;
    For he repents but ill
    His old crime for another who prepares.
    Thus, when my lady, while her bosom yearn'd
    With pity, deign'd to look on me, and knew
    That equal with my fault its penance grew,
    To my old state and shape I soon return'd.
    But nought there is on earth in which the wise
    May trust, for, wearying braving her afresh,
    To rugged stone she changed my quivering flesh.
    So that, in their old strain, my broken cries
    In vain ask'd death, or told her one name to deaf skies.

    A sad and wandering shade, I next recall,
    Through many a distant and deserted glen,
    That long I mourn'd my indissoluble thrall.
    At length my malady seem'd ended, when
    I to my earthly frame return'd again,
    Haply but greater grief therein to feel;
    Still following my desire with such fond zeal
    That once (beneath the proud sun's fiercest blaze,
    Returning from the chase, as was my wont)
    Naked, where gush'd a font,
    My fair and fatal tyrant met my gaze;
    I whom nought else could pleasure, paused to look,
    While, touch'd with shame as natural as intense,
    Herself to hide or punish my offence,
    She o'er my face the crystal waters shook
    --I still speak true, though truth may seem a lie--
    Instantly from my proper person torn,
    A solitary stag, I felt me borne
    In wingèd terrors the dark forest through,
    As still of my own dogs the rushing storm I flew
    My song! I never was that cloud of gold
    Which once descended in such precious rain,
    Easing awhile with bliss Jove's amorous pain;
    I was a flame, kindled by one bright eye,
    I was the bird which gladly soar'd on high,
    Exalting her whose praise in song I wake;
    Nor, for new fancies, knew I to forsake
    My first fond laurel, 'neath whose welcome shade
    Ever from my firm heart all meaner pleasures fade.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XX.

_Se l' onorata fronde, che prescrive._

TO STRAMAZZO OF PERUGIA, WHO INVITED HIM TO WRITE POETRY.


      If the world-honour'd leaf, whose green defies
    The wrath of Heaven when thunders mighty Jove,
    Had not to me prohibited the crown
    Which wreathes of wont the gifted poet's brow,
    I were a friend of these your idols too,
    Whom our vile age so shamelessly ignores:
    But that sore insult keeps me now aloof
    From the first patron of the olive bough:
    For Ethiop earth beneath its tropic sun
    Ne'er burn'd with such fierce heat, as I with rage
    At losing thing so comely and beloved.
    Resort then to some calmer fuller fount,
    For of all moisture mine is drain'd and dry,
    Save that which falleth from mine eyes in tears.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XXI.

_Amor piangeva, ed io con lui talvolta._

HE CONGRATULATES BOCCACCIO ON HIS RETURN TO THE RIGHT PATH.


      Love grieved, and I with him at times, to see
    By what strange practices and cunning art,
    You still continued from his fetters free,
    From whom my feet were never far apart.
    Since to the right way brought by God's decree,
    Lifting my hands to heaven with pious heart,
    I thank Him for his love and grace, for He
    The soul-prayer of the just will never thwart:
    And if, returning to the amorous strife,
    Its fair desire to teach us to deny,
    Hollows and hillocks in thy path abound,
    'Tis but to prove to us with thorns how rife
    The narrow way, the ascent how hard and high,
    Where with true virtue man at last is crown'd.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XXII.

_Più di me lieta non si vede a terra._

ON THE SAME SUBJECT.


      Than me more joyful never reach'd the shore
    A vessel, by the winds long tost and tried,
    Whose crew, late hopeless on the waters wide,
    To a good God their thanks, now prostrate, pour;
    Nor captive from his dungeon ever tore,
    Around whose neck the noose of death was tied,
    More glad than me, that weapon laid aside
    Which to my lord hostility long bore.
    All ye who honour love in poet strain,
    To the good minstrel of the amorous lay
    Return due praise, though once he went astray;
    For greater glory is, in Heaven's blest reign,
    Over one sinner saved, and higher praise,
    Than e'en for ninety-nine of perfect ways.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XXIII.

_Il successor di Carlo, che la chioma._

ON THE MOVEMENT OF THE EMPEROR AGAINST THE INFIDELS, AND THE RETURN OF
THE POPE TO ROME.


      The high successor of our Charles,[P] whose hair
    The crown of his great ancestor adorns,
    Already has ta'en arms, to bruise the horns
    Of Babylon, and all her name who bear;
    Christ's holy vicar with the honour'd load
    Of keys and cloak, returning to his home,
    Shall see Bologna and our noble Rome,
    If no ill fortune bar his further road.
    Best to your meek and high-born lamb belongs
    To beat the fierce wolf down: so may it be
    With all who loyalty and love deny.
    Console at length your waiting country's wrongs,
    And Rome's, who longs once more her spouse to see,
    And gird for Christ the good sword on thy thigh.

    MACGREGOR.

[Footnote P: Charlemagne.]




CANZONE II.

_O aspettata in ciel, beata e bella._

IN SUPPORT OF THE PROPOSED CRUSADE AGAINST THE INFIDELS.


      O spirit wish'd and waited for in heaven,
    That wearest gracefully our human clay,
    Not as with loading sin and earthly stain,
    Who lov'st our Lord's high bidding to obey,--
    Henceforth to thee the way is plain and even
    By which from hence to bliss we may attain.
    To waft o'er yonder main
    Thy bark, that bids the world adieu for aye
    To seek a better strand,
    The western winds their ready wings expand;
    Which, through the dangers of that dusky way,
    Where all deplore the first infringed command,
    Will guide her safe, from primal bondage free,
    Reckless to stop or stay,
    To that true East, where she desires to be.

      Haply the faithful vows, and zealous prayers,
    And pious tears by holy mortals shed,
    Have come before the mercy-seat above:
    Yet vows of ours but little can bestead,
    Nor human orison such merit bears
    As heavenly justice from its course can move.
    But He, the King whom angels serve and love,
    His gracious eyes hath turn'd upon the land
    Where on the cross He died;
    And a new Charlemagne hath qualified
    To work the vengeance that on high was plann'd,
    For whose delay so long hath Europe sigh'd.
    Such mighty aid He brings his faithful spouse,
    That at its sound the pride
    Of Babylon with trembling terror bows.

      All dwellers 'twixt the hills and wild Garonne,
    The Rhodanus, and Rhine, and briny wave,
    Are banded under red-cross banners brave;
    And all who honour'd guerdon fain would have
    From Pyrenees to the utmost west, are gone,
    Leaving Iberia lorn of warriors keen,
    And Britain, with the islands that are seen
    Between the columns and the starry wain,
    (Even to that land where shone
    The far-famed lore of sacred Helicon,)
    Diverse in language, weapon, garb and strain,
    Of valour true, with pious zeal rush on.
    What cause, what love, to this compared may be?
    What spouse, or infant train
    E'er kindled such a righteous enmity?

      There is a portion of the world that lies
    Far distant from the sun's all-cheering ray,
    For ever wrapt in ice and gelid snows;
    There under cloudy skies, in stinted day,
    A people dwell, whose heart their clime outvies
    By nature framed stern foemen of repose.
    Now new devotion in their bosom glows,
    With Gothic fury now they grasp the sword.
    Turk, Arab, and Chaldee,
    With all between us and that sanguine sea,
    Who trust in idol-gods, and slight the Lord,
    Thou know'st how soon their feeble strength would yield;
    A naked race, fearful and indolent,
    Unused the brand to wield,
    Whose distant aim upon the wind is sent.

      Now is the time to shake the ancient yoke
    From off our necks, and rend the veil aside
    That long in darkness hath involved our eyes;
    Let all whom Heaven with genius hath supplied,
    And all who great Apollo's name invoke,
    With fiery eloquence point out the prize,
    With tongue and pen call on the brave to rise;
    If Orpheus and Amphion, legends old,
    No marvel cause in thee,
    It were small wonder if Ausonia see
    Collecting at thy call her children bold,
    Lifting the spear of Jesus joyfully.
    Nor, if our ancient mother judge aright,
    Doth her rich page unfold
    Such noble cause in any former fight.

      Thou who hast scann'd, to heap a treasure fair,
    Story of ancient day and modern time,
    Soaring with earthly frame to heaven sublime,
    Thou know'st, from Mars' bold son, her ruler prime,
    To great Augustus, he whose waving hair
    Was thrice in triumph wreathed with laurel green,
    How Rome hath of her blood still lavish been
    To right the woes of many an injured land;
    And shall she now be slow,
    Her gratitude, her piety to show?
    In Christian zeal to buckle on the brand,
    For Mary's glorious Son to deal the blow?
    What ills the impious foeman must betide
    Who trust in mortal hand,
    If Christ himself lead on the adverse side!

      And turn thy thoughts to Xerxes' rash emprize,
    Who dared, in haste to tread our Europe's shore,
    Insult the sea with bridge, and strange caprice;
    And thou shalt see for husbands then no more
    The Persian matrons robed in mournful guise,
    And dyed with blood the seas of Salamis,
    Nor sole example this:
    (The ruin of that Eastern king's design),
    That tells of victory nigh:
    See Marathon, and stern Thermopylæ,
    Closed by those few, and chieftain leonine,
    And thousand deeds that blaze in history.
    Then bow in thankfulness both heart and knee
    Before his holy shrine,
    Who such bright guerdon hath reserved for thee.

      Thou shalt see Italy and that honour'd shore,
    O song! a land debarr'd and hid from me
    By neither flood nor hill!
    But love alone, whose power hath virtue still
    To witch, though all his wiles be vanity,
    Nor Nature to avoid the snare hath skill.
    Go, bid thy sisters hush their jealous fears,
    For other loves there be
    Than that blind boy, who causeth smiles and tears.

    MISS * * * (FOSCOLO'S ESSAY).


      O thou, in heaven expected, bright and blest,
    Spirit! who, from the common frailty free
    Of human kind, in human form art drest,
    God's handmaid, dutiful and dear to thee
    Henceforth the pathway easy lies and plain,
    By which, from earth, we bless eternal gain:
    Lo! at the wish, to waft thy venturous prore
    From the blind world it fain would leave behind
    And seek that better shore,
    Springs the sweet comfort of the western wind,
    Which safe amid this dark and dangerous vale,
    Where we our own, the primal sin deplore,
    Right on shall guide her, from her old chains freed,
    And, without let or fail,
    Where havens her best hope, to the true East shall lead.

      Haply the suppliant tears of pious men,
    Their earnest vows and loving prayers at last
    Unto the throne of heavenly grace have past;
    Yet, breathed by human helplessness, ah! when
    Had purest orison the skill and force
    To bend eternal justice from its course?
    But He, heaven's bounteous ruler from on high,
    On the sad sacred spot, where erst He bled,
    Will turn his pitying eye,
    And through the spirit of our new Charles spread
    Thirst of that vengeance, whose too long delay
    From general Europe wakes the bitter sigh;
    To his loved spouse such aid will He convey,
    That, his dread voice to hear,
    Proud Babylon shall shrink assail'd with secret fear.

      All, by the gay Garonne, the kingly Rhine,
    Between the blue Rhone and salt sea who dwell,
    All in whose bosoms worth and honour swell,
    Eagerly haste the Christian cross to join;
    Spain of her warlike sons, from the far west
    Unto the Pyrenee, pours forth her best:
    Britannia and the Islands, which are found
    Northward from Calpe, studding Ocean's breast,
    E'en to that land renown'd
    In the rich lore of sacred Helicon,
    Various in arms and language, garb and guise,
    With pious fury urge the bold emprize.
    What love was e'er so just, so worthy, known?
    Or when did holier flame
    Kindle the mind of man to a more noble aim?

      Far in the hardy north a land there lies,
    Buried in thick-ribb'd ice and constant snows,
    Where scant the days and clouded are the skies,
    And seldom the bright sun his glad warmth throws;
    There, enemy of peace by nature, springs
    A people to whom death no terror brings;
    If these, with new devotedness, we see
    In Gothic fury baring the keen glaive,
    Turk, Arab, and Chaldee!
    All, who, between us and the Red Sea wave,
    To heathen gods bow the idolatrous knee,
    Arm and advance! we heed not your blind rage;
    A naked race, timid in act, and slow,
    Unskill'd the war to wage,
    Whose far aim on the wind contrives a coward blow.

      Now is the hour to free from the old yoke
    Our gallèd necks, to rend the veil away
    Too long permitted our dull sight to cloak:
    Now too, should all whose breasts the heavenly ray
    Of genius lights, exert its powers sublime,
    And or in bold harangue, or burning rhyme,
    Point the proud prize and fan the generous flame.
    If Orpheus and Amphion credit claim,
    Legends of distant time,
    Less marvel 'twere, if, at thy earnest call,
    Italia, with her children, should awake,
    And wield the willing lance for Christ's dear sake.
    Our ancient mother, read she right, in all
    Her fortune's history ne'er
    A cause of combat knew so glorious and so fair!

      Thou, whose keen mind has every theme explored,
    And truest ore from Time's rich treasury won,
    On earthly pinion who hast heavenward soar'd,
    Well knowest, from her founder, Mars' bold son,
    To great Augustus, he, whose brow around
    Thrice was the laurel green in triumph bound,
    How Rome was ever lavish of her blood,
    The right to vindicate, the weak redress;
    And now, when gratitude,
    When piety appeal, shall she do less
    To avenge the injury and end the scorn
    By blessed Mary's glorious offspring borne?
    What fear we, while the heathen for success
    Confide in human powers,
    If, on the adverse side, be Christ, and his side ours?

      Turn, too, when Xerxes our free shores to tread
    Rush'd in hot haste, and dream'd the perilous main
    With scourge and fetter to chastise and chain,
    --What see'st? Wild wailing o'er their husbands dead,
    Persia's pale matrons wrapt in weeds of woe,
    And red with gore the gulf of Salamis!
    To prove our triumph certain, to foreshow
    The utter ruin of our Eastern foe,
    No single instance this;
    Miltiades and Marathon recall,
    See, with his patriot few, Leonidas
    Closing, Thermopylæ, thy bloody pass!
    Like them to dare and do, to God let all
    With heart and knee bow down,
    Who for our arms and age has kept this great renown.

      Thou shalt see Italy, that honour'd land,
    Which from my eyes, O Song! nor seas, streams, heights,
    So long have barr'd and bann'd,
    But love alone, who with his haughty lights
    The more allures me as he worse excites,
    Till nature fails against his constant wiles.
    Go then, and join thy comrades; not alone
    Beneath fair female zone
    Dwells Love, who, at his will, moves us to tears or smiles.

    MACGREGOR.




CANZONE III.

_Verdi panni, sanguigni, oscuri o persi._

WHETHER OR NOT HE SHOULD CEASE TO LOVE LAURA.


      Green robes and red, purple, or brown, or gray
    No lady ever wore,
    Nor hair of gold in sunny tresses twined,
    So beautiful as she, who spoils my mind
    Of judgment, and from freedom's lofty path
    So draws me with her that I may not bear
    Any less heavy yoke.

    And if indeed at times--for wisdom fails
    Where martyrdom breeds doubt--
    The soul should ever arm it to complain
    Suddenly from each reinless rude desire
    Her smile recalls, and razes from my heart
    Every rash enterprise, while all disdain
    Is soften'd in her sight.

    For all that I have ever borne for love,
    And still am doom'd to bear,
    Till she who wounded it shall heal my heart,
    Rejecting homage e'en while she invites,
    Be vengeance done! but let not pride nor ire
    'Gainst my humility the lovely pass
    By which I enter'd bar.

    The hour and day wherein I oped my eyes
    On the bright black and white,
    Which drive me thence where eager love impell'd
    Where of that life which now my sorrow makes
    New roots, and she in whom our age is proud,
    Whom to behold without a tender awe
    Needs heart of lead or wood.

    The tear then from these eyes that frequent falls--
    HE thus my pale cheek bathes
    Who planted first within my fenceless flank
    Love's shaft--diverts me not from my desire;
    And in just part the proper sentence falls;
    For her my spirit sighs, and worthy she
    To staunch its secret wounds.

    Spring from within me these conflicting thoughts,
    To weary, wound myself,
    Each a sure sword against its master turn'd:
    Nor do I pray her to be therefore freed,
    For less direct to heaven all other paths,
    And to that glorious kingdom none can soar
    Certes in sounder bark.

    Benignant stars their bright companionship
    Gave to the fortunate side
    When came that fair birth on our nether world,
    Its sole star since, who, as the laurel leaf,
    The worth of honour fresh and fragrant keeps,
    Where lightnings play not, nor ungrateful winds
    Ever o'ersway its head.

    Well know I that the hope to paint in verse
    Her praises would but tire
    The worthiest hand that e'er put forth its pen:
    Who, in all Memory's richest cells, e'er saw
    Such angel virtue so rare beauty shrined,
    As in those eyes, twin symbols of all worth,
    Sweet keys of my gone heart?

    Lady, wherever shines the sun, than you
    Love has no dearer pledge.

    MACGREGOR.




SESTINA II

_Giovane donna sott' un verde lauro._

THOUGH DESPAIRING OF PITY, HE VOWS TO LOVE HER UNTO DEATH.


      A youthful lady 'neath a laurel green
    Was seated, fairer, colder than the snow
    On which no sun has shone for many years:
    Her sweet speech, her bright face, and flowing hair
    So pleased, she yet is present to my eyes,
    And aye must be, whatever fate prevail.

    These my fond thoughts of her shall fade and fail
    When foliage ceases on the laurel green;
    Nor calm can be my heart, nor check'd these eyes
    Until the fire shall freeze, or burns the snow:
    Easier upon my head to count each hair
    Than, ere that day shall dawn, the parting years.

    But, since time flies, and roll the rapid years,
    And death may, in the midst, of life, assail,
    With full brown locks, or scant and silver hair,
    I still the shade of that sweet laurel green
    Follow, through fiercest sun and deepest snow,
    Till the last day shall close my weary eyes.

    Oh! never sure were seen such brilliant eyes,
    In this our age or in the older years,
    Which mould and melt me, as the sun melts snow,
    Into a stream of tears adown the vale,
    Watering the hard roots of that laurel green,
    Whose boughs are diamonds and gold whose hair.

    I fear that Time my mien may change and hair,
    Ere, with true pity touch'd, shall greet my eyes
    My idol imaged in that laurel green:
    For, unless memory err, through seven long years
    Till now, full many a shore has heard my wail,
    By night, at noon, in summer and in snow.

    Thus fire within, without the cold, cold snow,
    Alone, with these my thoughts and her bright hair,
    Alway and everywhere I bear my ail,
    Haply to find some mercy in the eyes
    Of unborn nations and far future years,
    If so long flourishes our laurel green.

    The gold and topaz of the sun on snow
    Are shamed by the bright hair above those eyes,
    Searing the short green of my life's vain years.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XXIV.

_Quest' anima gentil che si diparte._

ON LAURA DANGEROUSLY ILL.


      That graceful soul, in mercy call'd away
    Before her time to bid the world farewell,
    If welcomed as she ought in the realms of day,
    In heaven's most blessèd regions sure shall dwell.
    There between Mars and Venus if she stay,
    Her sight the brightness of the sun will quell,
    Because, her infinite beauty to survey,
    The spirits of the blest will round her swell.
    If she decide upon the fourth fair nest
    Each of the three to dwindle will begin,
    And she alone the fame of beauty win,
    Nor e'en in the fifth circle may she rest;
    Thence higher if she soar, I surely trust
    Jove with all other stars in darkness will be thrust.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XXV.

_Quanto più m' avvicino al giorno estremo._

HE CONSOLES HIMSELF THAT HIS LIFE IS ADVANCING TO ITS CLOSE.


      Near and more near as life's last period draws,
    Which oft is hurried on by human woe,
    I see the passing hours more swiftly flow,
    And all my hopes in disappointment close.
    And to my heart I say, amidst its throes,
    "Not long shall we discourse of love below;
    For this my earthly load, like new-fall'n snow
    Fast melting, soon shall leave us to repose.
    With it will sink in dust each towering hope,
    Cherish'd so long within my faithful breast;
    No more shall we resent, fear, smile, complain:
    Then shall we clearly trace why some are blest,
    Through deepest misery raised to Fortune's top,
    And why so many sighs so oft are heaved in vain."

    WRANGHAM.


      The nearer I approach my life's last day,
    The certain day that limits human woe,
    I better mark, in Time's swift silent flow,
    How the fond hopes he brought all pass'd away.
    Of love no longer--to myself I say--
    We now may commune, for, as virgin snow,
    The hard and heavy load we drag below
    Dissolves and dies, ere rest in heaven repay.
    And prostrate with it must each fair hope lie
    Which here beguiled us and betray'd so long,
    And joy, grief, fear and pride alike shall cease:
    And then too shall we see with clearer eye
    How oft we trod in weary ways and wrong,
    And why so long in vain we sigh'd for peace.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XXVI.

_Già fiammeggiava l' amorosa stella._

LAURA, WHO IS ILL, APPEARS TO HIM IN A DREAM, AND ASSURES HIM _THAT SHE
STILL LIVES._


      Throughout the orient now began to flame
    The star of love; while o'er the northern sky
    That, which has oft raised Juno's jealousy,
    Pour'd forth its beauteous scintillating beam:
    Beside her kindled hearth the housewife dame,
    Half-dress'd, and slipshod, 'gan her distaff ply:
    And now the wonted hour of woe drew nigh,
    That wakes to tears the lover from his dream:
    When my sweet hope unto my mind appear'd,
    Not in the custom'd way unto my sight;
    For grief had bathed my lids, and sleep had weigh'd;
    Ah me, how changed that form by love endear'd!
    "Why lose thy fortitude?" methought she said,
    "These eyes not yet from thee withdraw their light."

    NOTT.


      Already in the east the amorous star
    Illumined heaven, while from her northern height
    Great Juno's rival through the dusky night
    Her beamy radiance shot. Returning care
    Had roused th' industrious hag, with footstep bare,
    And loins ungirt, the sleeping fire to light;
    And lovers thrill'd that season of despight,
    Which wont renew their tears, and wake despair.
    When my soul's hope, now on the verge of fate,
    (Not by th' accustomed way; for that in sleep
    Was closed, and moist with griefs,) attain'd my heart.
    Alas, how changed! "Servant, no longer weep,"
    She seem'd to say; "resume thy wonted state:
    Not yet thine eyes from mine are doom'd to part."

    CHARLEMONT.


      Already, in the east, the star of love
    Was flaming, and that other in the north,
    Which Juno's jealousy is wont to move,
    Its beautiful and lustrous rays shot forth;
    Barefooted and half clad, the housewife old
    Had stirr'd her fire, and set herself to weave;
    Each tender heart the thoughtful time controll'd
    Which evermore the lover wakes to grieve,
    When my fond hope, already at life's last,
    Came to my heart, not by the wonted way,
    Where sleep its seal, its dew where sorrow cast--
    Alas! how changed--and said, or seem'd to say,
    "Sight of these eyes not yet does Heaven refuse,
    Then wherefore should thy tost heart courage lose?"

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XXVII.

_Apollo, s' ancor vive il bel desio._

HE COMPARES HER TO A LAUREL, WHICH HE SUPPLICATES APOLLO TO DEFEND.


      O Phoebus, if that fond desire remains,
    Which fired thy breast near the Thessalian wave;
    If those bright tresses, which such pleasure gave,
    Through lapse of years thy memory not disdains;
    From sluggish frosts, from rude inclement rains.
    Which last the while thy beams our region leave,
    That honour'd sacred tree from peril save,
    Whose name of dear accordance waked our pains!
    And, by that amorous hope which soothed thy care,
    What time expectant thou wert doom'd to sigh
    Dispel those vapours which disturb our sky!
    So shall we both behold our favorite fair
    With wonder, seated on the grassy mead,
    And forming with her arms herself a shade.

    NOTT.


      If live the fair desire, Apollo, yet
    Which fired thy spirit once on Peneus' shore,
    And if the bright hair loved so well of yore
    In lapse of years thou dost not now forget,
    From the long frost, from seasons rude and keen,
    Which last while hides itself thy kindling brow,
    Defend this consecrate and honour'd bough,
    Which snared thee erst, whose slave I since have been.
    And, by the virtue of the love so dear
    Which soothed, sustain'd thee in that early strife,
    Our air from raw and lowering vapours clear:
    So shall we see our lady, to new life
    Restored, her seat upon the greensward take,
    Where her own graceful arms a sweet shade o'er her make.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XXVIII.

_Solo e pensoso i più deserti campi._

HE SEEKS SOLITUDE, BUT LOVE FOLLOWS HIM EVERYWHERE.


      Alone, and lost in thought, the desert glade
    Measuring I roam with ling'ring steps and slow;
    And still a watchful glance around me throw,
    Anxious to shun the print of human tread:
    No other means I find, no surer aid
    From the world's prying eye to hide my woe:
    So well my wild disorder'd gestures show,
    And love lorn looks, the fire within me bred,
    That well I deem each mountain, wood and plain,
    And river knows, what I from man conceal,
    What dreary hues my life's fond prospects dim.
    Yet whate'er wild or savage paths I've ta'en,
    Where'er I wander, love attends me still,
    Soft whisp'ring to my soul, and I to him.

    ANON., OX., 1795.


      Alone, and pensive, near some desert shore,
    Far from the haunts of men I love to stray,
    And, cautiously, my distant path explore
    Where never human footsteps mark'd the way.
    Thus from the public gaze I strive to fly,
    And to the winds alone my griefs impart;
    While in my hollow cheek and haggard eye
    Appears the fire that burns my inmost heart.
    But ah, in vain to distant scenes I go;
    No solitude my troubled thoughts allays.
    Methinks e'en things inanimate must know
    The flame that on my soul in secret preys;
    Whilst Love, unconquer'd, with resistless sway
    Still hovers round my path, still meets me on my way.

    J.B. TAYLOR.


      Alone and pensive, the deserted plain,
    With tardy pace and sad, I wander by;
    And mine eyes o'er it rove, intent to fly
    Where distant shores no trace of man retain;
    No help save this I find, some cave to gain
    Where never may intrude man's curious eye,
    Lest on my brow, a stranger long to joy,
    He read the secret fire which makes my pain
    For here, methinks, the mountain and the flood,
    Valley and forest the strange temper know
    Of my sad life conceal'd from others' sight--
    Yet where, where shall I find so wild a wood,
    A way so rough that there Love cannot go
    Communing with me the long day and night?

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XXIX.

_S' io credessi per morte essere scarco._

HE PRAYS FOR DEATH, BUT IN VAIN.


      Had I believed that Death could set me free
    From the anxious amorous thoughts my peace that mar,
    With these my own hands which yet stainless are,
    Life had I loosed, long hateful grown to me.
    Yet, for I fear 'twould but a passage be
    From grief to grief, from old to other war,
    Hither the dark shades my escape that bar,
    I still remain, nor hope relief to see.
    High time it surely is that he had sped
    The fatal arrow from his pitiless bow,
    In others' blood so often bathed and red;
    And I of Love and Death have pray'd it so--
    He listens not, but leaves me here half dead.
    Nor cares to call me to himself below.

    MACGREGOR.


      Oh! had I deem'd that Death had freed my soul
    From Love's tormenting, overwhelming thought,
    To crush its aching burthen I had sought,
    My wearied life had hasten'd to its goal;
    My shivering bark yet fear'd another shoal,
    To find one tempest with another bought,
    Thus poised 'twixt earth and heaven I dwell as naught,
    Not daring to assume my life's control.
    But sure 'tis time that Death's relentless bow
    Had wing'd that fatal arrow to my heart,
    So often bathed in life's dark crimson tide:
    But though I crave he would this boon bestow,
    He to my cheek his impress doth impart,
    And yet o'erlooks me in his fearful stride.

    WOLLASTON.




CANZONE IV.

_Si è debile il filo a cui s' attene._

HE GRIEVES IN ABSENCE FROM LAURA.


      The thread on which my weary life depends
    So fragile is and weak,
    If none kind succour lends,
    Soon 'neath the painful burden will it break;
    Since doom'd to take my sad farewell of her,
    In whom begins and ends
    My bliss, one hope, to stir
    My sinking spirit from its black despair,
    Whispers, "Though lost awhile
    That form so dear and fair,
    Sad soul! the trial bear,
    For thee e'en yet the sun may brightly shine,
    And days more happy smile,
    Once more the lost loved treasure may be thine."
    This thought awhile sustains me, but again
    To fail me and forsake in worse excess of pain.

    Time flies apace: the silent hours and swift
    So urge his journey on,
    Short span to me is left
    Even to think how quick to death I run;
    Scarce, in the orient heaven, yon mountain crest
    Smiles in the sun's first ray,
    When, in the adverse west,
    His long round run, we see his light decay
    So small of life the space,
    So frail and clogg'd with woe,
    To mortal man below,
    That, when I find me from that beauteous face
    Thus torn by fate's decree,
    Unable at a wish with her to be,
    So poor the profit that old comforts give,
    I know not how I brook in such a state to live.

    Each place offends, save where alone I see
    Those eyes so sweet and bright,
    Which still shall bear the key
    Of the soft thoughts I hide from other sight;
    And, though hard exile harder weighs on me,
    Whatever mood betide,
    I ask no theme beside,
    For all is hateful that I since have seen.
    What rivers and what heights,
    What shores and seas between
    Me rise and those twin lights,
    Which made the storm and blackness of my days
    One beautiful serene,
    To which tormented Memory still strays:
    Free as my life then pass'd from every care,
    So hard and heavy seems my present lot to bear.

    Alas! self-parleying thus, I but renew
    The warm wish in my mind,
    Which first within it grew
    The day I left my better half behind:
    If by long absence love is quench'd, then who
    Guides me to the old bait,
    Whence all my sorrows date?
    Why rather not my lips in silence seal'd?
    By finest crystal ne'er
    Were hidden tints reveal'd
    So faithfully and fair,
    As my sad spirit naked lays and bare
    Its every secret part,
    And the wild sweetness thrilling in my heart,
    Through eyes which, restlessly, o'erfraught with tears,
    Seek her whose sight alone with instant gladness cheers.

    Strange pleasure!--yet so often that within
    The human heart to reign
    Is found--to woo and win
    Each new brief toy that men most sigh to gain:
    And I am one from sadness who relief
    So draw, as if it still
    My study were to fill
    These eyes with softness, and this heart with grief:
    As weighs with me in chief
    Nay rather with sole force,
    The language and the light
    Of those dear eyes to urge me on that course,
    So where its fullest source
    Long sorrow finds, I fix my often sight,
    And thus my heart and eyes like sufferers be,
    Which in love's path have been twin pioneers to me.

    The golden tresses which should make, I ween,
    The sun with envy pine;
    And the sweet look serene,
    Where love's own rays so bright and burning shine,
    That, ere its time, they make my strength decline,
    Each wise and truthful word,
    Rare in the world, which late
    She smiling gave, no more are seen or heard.
    But this of all my fate
    Is hardest to endure,
    That here I am denied
    The gentle greeting, angel-like and pure,
    Which still to virtue's side
    Inclined my heart with modest magic lure;
    So that, in sooth, I nothing hope again
    Of comfort more than this, how best to bear my pain.

    And--with fit ecstacy my loss to mourn--
    The soft hand's snowy charm,
    The finely-rounded arm,
    The winning ways, by turns, that quiet scorn,
    Chaste anger, proud humility adorn,
    The fair young breast that shrined
    Intellect pure and high,
    Are now all hid the rugged Alp behind.
    My trust were vain to try
    And see her ere I die,
    For, though awhile he dare
    Such dreams indulge, Hope ne'er can constant be,
    But falls back in despair
    Her, whom Heaven honours, there again to see,
    Where virtue, courtesy in her best mix,
    And where so oft I pray my future home to fix.

    My Song! if thou shalt see,
    Our common lady in that dear retreat,
    We both may hope that she
    Will stretch to thee her fair and fav'ring hand,
    Whence I so far am bann'd;
    --Touch, touch it not, but, reverent at her feet,
    Tell her I will be there with earliest speed,
    A man of flesh and blood, or else a spirit freed.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XXX.

_Orso, e' non furon mai fiumi nè stagni._

HE COMPLAINS OF THE VEIL AND HAND OF LAURA, THAT THEY DEPRIVE HIM OF THE
SIGHT OF HER EYES.


      Orso, my friend, was never stream, nor lake,
    Nor sea in whose broad lap all rivers fall,
    Nor shadow of high hill, or wood, or wall,
    Nor heaven-obscuring clouds which torrents make,
    Nor other obstacles my grief so wake,
    Whatever most that lovely face may pall,
    As hiding the bright eyes which me enthrall,
    That veil which bids my heart "Now burn or break,"
    And, whether by humility or pride,
    Their glance, extinguishing mine every joy,
    Conducts me prematurely to my tomb:
    Also my soul by one fair hand is tried,
    Cunning and careful ever to annoy,
    'Gainst my poor eyes a rock that has become.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XXXI.

_Io temo sì de' begli occhi l' assalto._

HE EXCUSES HIMSELF FOR HAVING SO LONG DELAYED TO VISIT HER.


      So much I fear to encounter her bright eye.
    Alway in which my death and Love reside,
    That, as a child the rod, its glance I fly,
    Though long the time has been since first I tried;
    And ever since, so wearisome or high,
    No place has been where strong will has not hied,
    Her shunning, at whose sight my senses die,
    And, cold as marble, I am laid aside:
    Wherefore if I return to see you late,
    Sure 'tis no fault, unworthy of excuse,
    That from my death awhile I held aloof:
    At all to turn to what men shun, their fate,
    And from such fear my harass'd heart to loose,
    Of its true faith are ample pledge and proof.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XXXII.

_S' amore o morte non dà qualche stroppio._

HE ASKS FROM A FRIEND THE LOAN OF THE WORKS OF ST. AUGUSTIN.


      If Love or Death no obstacle entwine
    With the new web which here my fingers fold,
    And if I 'scape from beauty's tyrant hold
    While natural truth with truth reveal'd I join,
    Perchance a work so double will be mine
    Between our modern style and language old,
    That (timidly I speak, with hope though bold)
    Even to Rome its growing fame may shine:
    But, since, our labour to perfèct at last
    Some of the blessed threads are absent yet
    Which our dear father plentifully met,
    Wherefore to me thy hands so close and fast
    Against their use? Be prompt of aid and free,
    And rich our harvest of fair things shall be.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XXXIII

_Quando dal proprio sito si rimove._

WHEN LAURA DEPARTS, THE HEAVENS GROW DARK WITH STORMS.


      When from its proper soil the tree is moved
    Which Phoebus loved erewhile in human form,
    Grim Vulcan at his labour sighs and sweats,
    Renewing ever the dread bolts of Jove,
    Who thunders now, now speaks in snow and rain,
    Nor Julius honoureth than Janus more:
    Earth moans, and far from us the sun retires
    Since his dear mistress here no more is seen.
    Then Mars and Saturn, cruel stars, resume
    Their hostile rage: Orion arm'd with clouds
    The helm and sails of storm-tost seamen breaks.
    To Neptune and to Juno and to us
    Vext Æolus proves his power, and makes us feel
    How parts the fair face angels long expect.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XXXIV.

_Ma poi che 'l dolce riso umile e piano._

HER RETURN GLADDENS THE EARTH AND CALMS THE SKY.


      But when her sweet smile, modest and benign,
    No longer hides from us its beauties rare,
    At the spent forge his stout and sinewy arms
    Plieth that old Sicilian smith in vain,
    For from the hands of Jove his bolts are taken
    Temper'd in Ætna to extremest proof;
    And his cold sister by degrees grows calm
    And genial in Apollo's kindling beams.
    Moves from the rosy west a summer breath,
    Which safe and easy wafts the seaward bark,
    And wakes the sweet flowers in each grassy mead.
    Malignant stars on every side depart,
    Dispersed before that bright enchanting face,
    For which already many tears are shed.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XXXV.

_Il figliuol di Latona avea già nove._

THE GRIEF OF PHOEBUS AT THE LOSS OF HIS LOVE.


      Nine times already had Latona's son
    Look'd from the highest balcony of heaven
    For her, who whilom waked his sighs in vain,
    And sighs as vain now wakes in other breasts;
    Then seeking wearily, nor knowing where
    She dwelt, or far or near, and why delay'd,
    He show'd himself to us as one, insane
    For grief, who cannot find some loved lost thing:
    And thus, for clouds of sorrow held aloof,
    Saw not the fair face turn, which, if I live,
    In many a page shall praised and honour'd be,
    The misery of her loss so changed her mien
    That her bright eyes were dimm'd, for once, with tears,
    Thereon its former gloom the air resumed.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XXXVI.

_Quel che 'n Tessaglia ebbe le man sì pronte._

SOME HAVE WEPT FOR THEIR WORST ENEMIES, BUT LAURA DEIGNS HIM NOT A
SINGLE TEAR.


      He who for empire at Pharsalia threw,
    Reddening its beauteous plain with civil gore,
    As Pompey's corse his conquering soldiers bore,
    Wept when the well-known features met his view:
    The shepherd youth, who fierce Goliath slew,
    Had long rebellious children to deplore,
    And bent, in generous grief, the brave Saul o'er
    His shame and fall when proud Gilboa knew:
    But you, whose cheek with pity never paled,
    Who still have shields at hand to guard you well
    Against Love's bow, which shoots its darts in vain,
    Behold me by a thousand deaths assail'd,
    And yet no tears of thine compassion tell,
    But in those bright eyes anger and disdain.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XXXVII.

_Il mio avversario, in cui veder solete._

LAURA AT HER LOOKING-GLASS.


      My foe, in whom you see your own bright eyes,
    Adored by Love and Heaven with honour due,
    With beauties not its own enamours you,
    Sweeter and happier than in mortal guise.
    Me, by its counsel, lady, from your breast,
    My chosen cherish'd home, your scorn expell'd
    In wretched banishment, perchance not held
    Worthy to dwell where you alone should rest.
    But were I fasten'd there with strongest keys,
    That mirror should not make you, at my cost,
    Severe and proud yourself alone to please.
    Remember how Narcissus erst was lost!
    His course and thine to one conclusion lead,
    Of flower so fair though worthless here the mead.

    MACGREGOR.


      My mirror'd foe reflects, alas! so fair
    Those eyes which Heaven and Love have honour'd too!
    Yet not his charms thou dost enamour'd view,
    But all thine own, and they beyond compare:
    O lady! thou hast chased me at its prayer
    From thy heart's throne, where I so fondly grew;
    O wretched exile! though too well I knew
    A reign with thee I were unfit to share.
    But were I ever fix'd thy bosom's mate,
    A flattering mirror should not me supplant,
    And make thee scorn me in thy self-delight;
    Thou surely must recall Narcissus' fate,
    But if like him thy doom should thee enchant,
    What mead were worthy of a flower so bright?

    WOLLASTON.




SONNET XXXVIII.

_L' oro e le perle, e i fior vermigli e i bianchi._

HE INVEIGHS AGAINST LAURA'S MIRROR, BECAUSE IT MAKES HER FORGET HIM.


      Those golden tresses, teeth of pearly white,
    Those cheeks' fair roses blooming to decay,
    Do in their beauty to my soul convey
    The poison'd arrows from my aching sight.
    Thus sad and briefly must my days take flight,
    For life with woe not long on earth will stay;
    But more I blame that mirror's flattering sway,
    Which thou hast wearied with thy self-delight.
    Its power my bosom's sovereign too hath still'd,
    Who pray'd thee in my suit--now he is mute,
    Since thou art captured by thyself alone:
    Death's seeds it hath within my heart instill'd,
    For Lethe's stream its form doth constitute,
    And makes thee lose each image but thine own.

    WOLLASTON.


      The gold and pearls, the lily and the rose
    Which weak and dry in winter wont to be,
    Are rank and poisonous arrow-shafts to me,
    As my sore-stricken bosom aptly shows:
    Thus all my days now sadly shortly close,
    For seldom with great grief long years agree;
    But in that fatal glass most blame I see,
    That weary with your oft self-liking grows.
    It on my lord placed silence, when my suit
    He would have urged, but, seeing your desire
    End in yourself alone, he soon was mute.
    'Twas fashion'd in hell's wave and o'er its fire,
    And tinted in eternal Lethe: thence
    The spring and secret of my death commence.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XXXIX.

_Io sentia dentr' al cor già venir meno._

HE DESIRES AGAIN TO GAZE ON THE EYES Of LAURA.


      I now perceived that from within me fled
    Those spirits to which you their being lend;
    And since by nature's dictates to defend
    Themselves from death all animals are made,
    The reins I loosed, with which Desire I stay'd,
    And sent him on his way without a friend;
    There whither day and night my course he'd bend,
    Though still from thence by me reluctant led.
    And me ashamed and slow along he drew
    To see your eyes their matchless influence shower,
    Which much I shun, afraid to give you pain.
    Yet for myself this once I'll live; such power
    Has o'er this wayward life one look from you:--
    Then die, unless Desire prevails again.

    ANON., OX., 1795.


      Because the powers that take their life from you
    Already had I felt within decay,
    And because Nature, death to shield or slay,
    Arms every animal with instinct true,
    To my long-curb'd desire the rein I threw,
    And turn'd it in the old forgotten way,
    Where fondly it invites me night and day,
    Though 'gainst its will, another I pursue.
    And thus it led me back, ashamed and slow,
    To see those eyes with love's own lustre rife
    Which I am watchful never to offend:
    Thus may I live perchance awhile below;
    One glance of yours such power has o'er my life
    Which sure, if I oppose desire, shall end.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XL.

_Se mai foco per foco non si spense._

HIS HEART IS ALL IN FLAMES, BUT HIS TONGUE IS MUTE, IN HER PRESENCE.


      If fire was never yet by fire subdued,
    If never flood fell dry by frequent rain,
    But, like to like, if each by other gain,
    And contraries are often mutual food;
    Love, who our thoughts controllest in each mood,
    Through whom two bodies thus one soul sustain,
    How, why in her, with such unusual strain
    Make the want less by wishes long renewed?
    Perchance, as falleth the broad Nile from high,
    Deafening with his great voice all nature round,
    And as the sun still dazzles the fix'd eye,
    So with itself desire in discord found
    Loses in its impetuous object force,
    As the too frequent spur oft checks the course.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XLI.

_Perch' io t' abbia guardato di menzogna._

IN HER PRESENCE HE CAN NEITHER SPEAK, WEEP, NOR SIGH.


      Although from falsehood I did thee restrain
    With all my power, and paid thee honour due,
    Ungrateful tongue; yet never did accrue
    Honour from thee, but shame, and fierce disdain:
    Most art thou cold, when most I want the strain
    Thy aid should lend while I for pity sue;
    And all thy utterance is imperfect too,
    When thou dost speak, and as the dreamer's vain.
    Ye too, sad tears, throughout each lingering night
    Upon me wait, when I alone would stay;
    But, needed by my peace, you take your flight:
    And, all so prompt anguish and grief t' impart,
    Ye sighs, then slow, and broken breathe your way:
    My looks alone truly reveal my heart.

    NOTT.


      With all my power, lest falsehood should invade,
    I guarded thee and still thy honour sought,
    Ungrateful tongue! who honour ne'er hast brought,
    But still my care with rage and shame repaid:
    For, though to me most requisite, thine aid,
    When mercy I would ask, availeth nought,
    Still cold and mute, and e'en to words if wrought
    They seem as sounds in sleep by dreamers made.
    And ye, sad tears, o' nights, when I would fain
    Be left alone, my sure companions, flow,
    But, summon'd for my peace, ye soon depart:
    Ye too, mine anguish'd sighs, so prompt to pain,
    Then breathe before her brokenly and slow,
    And my face only speaks my suffering heart.

    MACGREGOR.




CANZONE V.

_Nella stagion che 'l ciel rapido inchina._

NIGHT BRINGS REPOSE TO OTHERS, BUT NOT TO HIM.


      In that still season, when the rapid sun
    Drives down the west, and daylight flies to greet
    Nations that haply wait his kindling flame;
    In some strange land, alone, her weary feet
    The time-worn pilgrim finds, with toil fordone,
    Yet but the more speeds on her languid frame;
    Her solitude the same,
    When night has closed around;
    Yet has the wanderer found
    A deep though short forgetfulness at last
    Of every woe, and every labour past.
    But ah! my grief, that with each moment grows,
    As fast, and yet more fast,
    Day urges on, is heaviest at its close.

    When Phoebus rolls his everlasting wheels
    To give night room; and from encircling wood,
    Broader and broader yet descends the shade;
    The labourer arms him for his evening trade,
    And all the weight his burthen'd heart conceals
    Lightens with glad discourse or descant rude;
    Then spreads his board with food,
    Such as the forest hoar
    To our first fathers bore,
    By us disdain'd, yet praised in hall and bower,
    But, let who will the cup of joyance pour,
    I never knew, I will not say of mirth,
    But of repose, an hour,
    When Phoebus leaves, and stars salute the earth.

    Yon shepherd, when the mighty star of day
    He sees descending to its western bed,
    And the wide Orient all with shade embrown'd,
    Takes his old crook, and from the fountain head,
    Green mead, and beechen bower, pursues his way,
    Calling, with welcome voice, his flocks around;
    Then far from human sound,
    Some desert cave he strows
    With leaves and verdant boughs,
    And lays him down, without a thought, to sleep.
    Ah, cruel Love!--then dost thou bid me keep
    My idle chase, the airy steps pursuing
    Of her I ever weep,
    Who flies me still, my endless toil renewing.

    E'en the rude seaman, in some cave confined,
    Pillows his head, as daylight quits the scene,
    On the hard deck, with vilest mat o'erspread;
    And when the Sun in orient wave serene
    Bathes his resplendent front, and leaves behind
    Those antique pillars of his boundless bed;
    Forgetfulness has shed
    O'er man, and beast, and flower,
    Her mild restoring power:
    But my determined grief finds no repose;
    And every day but aggravates the woes
    Of that remorseless flood, that, ten long years,
    Flowing, yet ever flows,
    Nor know I what can check its ceaseless tears.

    MERIVALE.


      What time towards the western skies
    The sun with parting radiance flies,
    And other climes gilds with expected light,
    Some aged pilgrim dame who strays
    Alone, fatigued, through pathless ways,
    Hastens her step, and dreads the approach of night
    Then, the day's journey o'er, she'll steep
    Her sense awhile in grateful sleep;
    Forgetting all the pain, and peril past;
    But I, alas! find no repose,
    Each sun to me brings added woes,
    While light's eternal orb rolls from us fast.

    When the sun's wheels no longer glow,
    And hills their lengthen'd shadows throw,
    The hind collects his tools, and carols gay;
    Then spreads his board with frugal fare,
    Such as those homely acorns were,
    Which all revere, yet casting them away,
    Let those, who pleasure can enjoy,
    In cheerfulness their hours employ;
    While I, of all earth's wretches most unblest,
    Whether the sun fierce darts his beams,
    Whether the moon more mildly gleams,
    Taste no delight, no momentary rest!

    When the swain views the star of day
    Quench in the pillowing waves its ray,
    And scatter darkness o'er the eastern skies
    Rising, his custom'd crook he takes,
    The beech-wood, fountain, plain forsakes,
    As calmly homeward with his flock he hies
    Remote from man, then on his bed
    In cot, or cave, with fresh leaves spread,
    He courts soft slumber, and suspense from care,
    While thou, fell Love, bidst me pursue
    That voice, those footsteps which subdue
    My soul; yet movest not th' obdurate fair!

    Lock'd in some bay, to taste repose
    On the hard deck, the sailor throws
    His coarse garb o'er him, when the car of light
    Granada, with Marocco leaves,
    The Pillars famed, Iberia's waves,
    And the world's hush'd, and all its race, in night.
    But never will my sorrows cease,
    Successive days their sum increase,
    Though just ten annual suns have mark'd my pain;
    Say, to this bosom's poignant grief
    Who shall administer relief?
    Say, who at length shall free me from my chain?

    And, since there's comfort in the strain,
    I see at eve along each plain.
    And furrow'd hill, the unyoked team return:
    Why at that hour will no one stay
    My sighs, or bear my yoke away?
    Why bathed in tears must I unceasing mourn?
    Wretch that I was, to fix my sight
    First on that face with such delight,
    Till on my thought its charms were strong imprest,
    Which force shall not efface, nor art,
    Ere from this frame my soul dispart!
    Nor know I then if passion's votaries rest.

    O hasty strain, devoid of worth,
    Sad as the bard who brought thee forth,
    Show not thyself, be with the world at strife,
    From nook to nook indulge thy grief;
    While thy lorn parent seeks relief,
    Nursing that amorous flame which feeds his life!

    NOTT.




SONNET XLII.

_Poco era ad appressarsi agli occhi miei._

SUCH ARE HIS SUFFERINGS THAT HE ENVIES THE INSENSIBILITY OF MARBLE.


      Had but the light which dazzled them afar
    Drawn but a little nearer to mine eyes,
    Methinks I would have wholly changed my form,
    Even as in Thessaly her form she changed:
    But if I cannot lose myself in her
    More than I have--small mercy though it won--
    I would to-day in aspect thoughtful be,
    Of harder stone than chisel ever wrought,
    Of adamant, or marble cold and white,
    Perchance through terror, or of jasper rare
    And therefore prized by the blind greedy crowd.
    Then were I free from this hard heavy yoke
    Which makes me envy Atlas, old and worn,
    Who with his shoulders brings Morocco night.

    ANON.




MADRIGALE I.

_Non al suo amante più Diana piacque._

ANYTHING THAT REMINDS HIM OF LAURA RENEWS HIS TORMENTS.


      Not Dian to her lover was more dear,
    When fortune 'mid the waters cold and clear,
    Gave him her naked beauties all to see,
    Than seem'd the rustic ruddy nymph to me,
    Who, in yon flashing stream, the light veil laved,
    Whence Laura's lovely tresses lately waved;
    I saw, and through me felt an amorous chill,
    Though summer burn, to tremble and to thrill.

    MACGREGOR.




CANZONE VI.

_Spirto gentil che quelle membra reggi._

TO RIENZI, BESEECHING HIM TO RESTORE TO ROME HER ANCIENT LIBERTY.


      Spirit heroic! who with fire divine
    Kindlest those limbs, awhile which pilgrim hold
    On earth a Chieftain, gracious, wise, and bold;
    Since, rightly, now the rod of state is thine
    Rome and her wandering children to confine,
    And yet reclaim her to the old good way:
    To thee I speak, for elsewhere not a ray
    Of virtue can I find, extinct below,
    Nor one who feels of evil deeds the shame.
    Why Italy still waits, and what her aim
    I know not, callous to her proper woe,
    Indolent, aged, slow,
    Still will she sleep? Is none to rouse her found?
    Oh! that my wakening hands were through her tresses wound.

    So grievous is the spell, the trance so deep,
    Loud though we call, my hope is faint that e'er
    She yet will waken from her heavy sleep:
    But not, methinks, without some better end
    Was this our Rome entrusted to thy care,
    Who surest may revive and best defend.
    Fearlessly then upon that reverend head,
    'Mid her dishevell'd locks, thy fingers spread,
    And lift at length the sluggard from the dust;
    I, day and night, who her prostration mourn,
    For this, in thee, have fix'd my certain trust,
    That, if her sons yet turn.
    And their eyes ever to true honour raise.
    The glory is reserved for thy illustrious days!

    Her ancient walls, which still with fear and love
    The world admires, whene'er it calls to mind
    The days of Eld, and turns to look behind;
    Her hoar and cavern'd monuments above
    The dust of men, whose fame, until the world
    In dissolution sink, can never fail;
    Her all, that in one ruin now lies hurl'd,
    Hopes to have heal'd by thee its every ail.
    O faithful Brutus! noble Scipios dead!
    To you what triumph, where ye now are blest,
    If of our worthy choice the fame have spread:
    And how his laurell'd crest,
    Will old Fabricius rear, with joy elate,
    That his own Rome again shall beauteous be and great!

    And, if for things of earth its care Heaven show,
    The souls who dwell above in joy and peace,
    And their mere mortal frames have left below,
    Implore thee this long civil strife may cease,
    Which kills all confidence, nips every good,
    Which bars the way to many a roof, where men
    Once holy, hospitable lived, the den
    Of fearless rapine now and frequent blood,
    Whose doors to virtue only are denied.
    While beneath plunder'd Saints, in outraged fanes
    Plots Faction, and Revenge the altar stains;
    And, contrast sad and wide,
    The very bells which sweetly wont to fling
    Summons to prayer and praise now Battle's tocsin ring!

    Pale weeping women, and a friendless crowd
    Of tender years, infirm and desolate Age,
    Which hates itself and its superfluous days,
    With each blest order to religion vow'd,
    Whom works of love through lives of want engage,
    To thee for help their hands and voices raise;
    While our poor panic-stricken land displays
    The thousand wounds which now so mar her frame,
    That e'en from foes compassion they command;
    Or more if Christendom thy care may claim.
    Lo! God's own house on fire, while not a hand
    Moves to subdue the flame:
    --Heal thou these wounds, this feverish tumult end,
    And on the holy work Heaven's blessing shall descend!

    Often against our marble Column high
    Wolf, Lion, Bear, proud Eagle, and base Snake
    Even to their own injury insult shower;
    Lifts against thee and theirs her mournful cry,
    The noble Dame who calls thee here to break
    Away the evil weeds which will not flower.
    A thousand years and more! and gallant men
    There fix'd her seat in beauty and in power;
    The breed of patriot hearts has fail'd since then!
    And, in their stead, upstart and haughty now,
    A race, which ne'er to her in reverence bends,
    Her husband, father thou!
    Like care from thee and counsel she attends,
    As o'er his other works the Sire of all extends.

    'Tis seldom e'en that with our fairest scheme
    Some adverse fortune will not mix, and mar
    With instant ill ambition's noblest dreams;
    But thou, once ta'en thy path, so walk that I
    May pardon her past faults, great as they are,
    If now at least she give herself the lie.
    For never, in all memory, as to thee,
    To mortal man so sure and straight the way
    Of everlasting honour open lay,
    For thine the power and will, if right I see,
    To lift our empire to its old proud state.
    Let this thy glory be!
    They succour'd her when young, and strong, and great,
    He, in her weak old age, warded the stroke of Fate.
    Forth on thy way! my Song, and, where the bold
    Tarpeian lifts his brow, shouldst thou behold,
    Of others' weal more thoughtful than his own,
    The chief, by general Italy revered,
    Tell him from me, to whom he is but known
    As one to Virtue and by Fame endear'd,
    Till stamp'd upon his heart the sad truth be,
    That, day by day to thee,
    With suppliant attitude and streaming eyes,
    For justice and relief our seven-hill'd city cries.

    MACGREGOR.




MADRIGALE II.

_Perchè al viso d' Amor portava insegna._

A LOVE JOURNEY--DANGER IN THE PATH--HE TURNS BACK.


      Bright in whose face Love's conquering ensign stream'd,
    A foreign fair so won me, young and vain,
    That of her sex all others worthless seem'd:
    Her as I follow'd o'er the verdant plain,
    I heard a loud voice speaking from afar,
    "How lost in these lone woods his footsteps are!"
    Then paused I, and, beneath the tall beech shade,
    All wrapt in thought, around me well survey'd,
    Till, seeing how much danger block'd my way,
    Homeward I turn'd me though at noon of day.

    MACGREGOR.




BALLATA III.

_Quel foco, ch' io pensai che fosse spento._

HE THOUGHT HIMSELF FREE, BUT FINDS THAT HE IS MORE THAN EVER ENTHRALLED
BY LOVE.


      That fire for ever which I thought at rest,
    Quench'd in the chill blood of my ripen'd years,
    Awakes new flames and torment in my breast.
    Its sparks were never all, from what I see,
    Extinct, but merely slumbering, smoulder'd o'er;
    Haply this second error worse may be,
    For, by the tears, which I, in torrents, pour,
    Grief, through these eyes, distill'd from my heart's core,
    Which holds within itself the spark and bait,
    Remains not as it was, but grows more great.
    What fire, save mine, had not been quench'd and kill'd
    Beneath the flood these sad eyes ceaseless shed?
    Struggling 'mid opposites--so Love has will'd--
    Now here, now there, my vain life must be led,
    For in so many ways his snares are spread,
    When most I hope him from my heart expell'd
    Then most of her fair face its slave I'm held.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XLIII.

_Se col cieco desir che 'l cor distrugge._

BLIGHTED HOPE.


      Either that blind desire, which life destroys
    Counting the hours, deceives my misery,
    Or, even while yet I speak, the moment flies,
    Promised at once to pity and to me.
    Alas! what baneful shade o'erhangs and dries
    The seed so near its full maturity?
    'Twixt me and hope what brazen walls arise?
    From murderous wolves not even my fold is free.
    Ah, woe is me! Too clearly now I find
    That felon Love, to aggravate my pain,
    Mine easy heart hath thus to hope inclined;
    And now the maxim sage I call to mind,
    That mortal bliss must doubtful still remain
    Till death from earthly bonds the soul unbind.

    CHARLEMONT.


      Counting the hours, lest I myself mislead
    By blind desire wherewith my heart is torn,
    E'en while I speak away the moments speed,
    To me and pity which alike were sworn.
    What shade so cruel as to blight the seed
    Whence the wish'd fruitage should so soon be born?
    What beast within my fold has leap'd to feed?
    What wall is built between the hand and corn?
    Alas! I know not, but, if right I guess,
    Love to such joyful hope has only led
    To plunge my weary life in worse distress;
    And I remember now what once I read,
    Until the moment of his full release
    Man's bliss begins not, nor his troubles cease.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XLIV.

_Mie venture al venir son tarde e pigre._

FEW ARE THE SWEETS, BUT MANY THE BITTERS OF LOVE.


      Ever my hap is slack and slow in coming,
    Desire increasing, ay my hope uncertain
    With doubtful love, that but increaseth pain;
    For, tiger-like, so swift it is in parting.
    Alas! the snow black shall it be and scalding,
    The sea waterless, and fish upon the mountain,
    The Thames shall back return into his fountain,
    And where he rose the sun shall take [his] lodging,
    Ere I in this find peace or quietness;
    Or that Love, or my Lady, right wisely,
    Leave to conspire against me wrongfully.
    And if I have, after such bitterness,
    One drop of sweet, my mouth is out of taste,
    That all my trust and travail is but waste.

    WYATT.


      Late to arrive my fortunes are and slow--
    Hopes are unsure, desires ascend and swell,
    Suspense, expectancy in me rebel--
    But swifter to depart than tigers go.
    Tepid and dark shall be the cold pure snow,
    The ocean dry, its fish on mountains dwell,
    The sun set in the East, by that old well
    Alike whence Tigris and Euphrates flow,
    Ere in this strife I peace or truce shall find,
    Ere Love or Laura practise kinder ways,
    Sworn friends, against me wrongfully combined.
    After such bitters, if some sweet allays,
    Balk'd by long fasts my palate spurns the fare,
    Sole grace from them that falleth to my share.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XLV.

_La guancia che fu già piangendo stanca._

TO HIS FRIEND AGAPITO, WITH A PRESENT.


      Thy weary cheek that channell'd sorrow shows,
    My much loved lord, upon the one repose;
    More careful of thyself against Love be,
    Tyrant who smiles his votaries wan to see;
    And with the other close the left-hand path
    Too easy entrance where his message hath;
    In sun and storm thyself the same display,
    Because time faileth for the lengthen'd way.
    And, with the third, drink of the precious herb
    Which purges every thought that would disturb,
    Sweet in the end though sour at first in taste:
    But me enshrine where your best joys are placed,
    So that I fear not the grim bark of Styx,
    If with such prayer of mine pride do not mix.

    MACGREGOR.




BALLATA IV.

_Perchè quel che mi trasse ad amar prima._

HE WILL ALWAYS LOVE HER, THOUGH DENIED THE SIGHT OF HER.


      Though cruelty denies my view
    Those charms which led me first to love;
    To passion yet will I be true,
    Nor shall my will rebellious prove.
    Amid the curls of golden hair
    That wave those beauteous temples round,
    Cupid spread craftily the snare
    With which my captive heart he bound:
    And from those eyes he caught the ray
    Which thaw'd the ice that fenced my breast,
    Chasing all other thoughts away,
    With brightness suddenly imprest.
    But now that hair of sunny gleam,
    Ah me! is ravish'd from my sight;
    Those beauteous eyes withdraw their beam,
    And change to sadness past delight.
    A glorious death by all is prized;
    Tis death alone shall break my chain:
    Oh! be Love's timid wail despised.
    Lovers should nobly suffer pain.

    NOTT.

      Though barr'd from all which led me first to love
    By coldness or caprice,
    Not yet from its firm bent can passion cease!
    The snare was set amid those threads of gold,
    To which Love bound me fast;
    And from those bright eyes melted the long cold
    Within my heart that pass'd;
    So sweet the spell their sudden splendour cast,
    Its single memory still
    Deprives my soul of every other will.
    But now, alas! from me of that fine hair
    Is ravish'd the dear sight;
    The lost light of those twin stars, chaste as fair,
    Saddens me in her flight;
    But, since a glorious death wins honour bright,
    By death, and not through grief,
    Love from such chain shall give at last relief.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XLVI.

_L' arbor gentil che forte amai molt' anni._

IMPRECATION AGAINST THE LAUREL.


      The graceful tree I loved so long and well,
    Ere its fair boughs in scorn my flame declined,
    Beneath its shade encouraged my poor mind
    To bud and bloom, and 'mid its sorrow swell.
    But now, my heart secure from such a spell,
    Alas, from friendly it has grown unkind!
    My thoughts entirely to one end confined,
    Their painful sufferings how I still may tell.
    What should he say, the sighing slave of love,
    To whom my later rhymes gave hope of bliss,
    Who for that laurel has lost all--but this?
    May poet never pluck thee more, nor Jove
    Exempt; but may the sun still hold in hate
    On each green leaf till blight and blackness wait.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XLVII.

_Benedetto sia 'l giorno e 'l mese e l' anno._

HE BLESSES ALL THE CIRCUMSTANCES OF HIS PASSION.


      Blest be the day, and blest the month, the year,
    The spring, the hour, the very moment blest,
    The lovely scene, the spot, where first oppress'd
    I sunk, of two bright eyes the prisoner:
    And blest the first soft pang, to me most dear,
    Which thrill'd my heart, when Love became its guest;
    And blest the bow, the shafts which pierced my breast,
    And even the wounds, which bosom'd thence I bear.
    Blest too the strains which, pour'd through glade and grove,
    Have made the woodlands echo with her name;
    The sighs, the tears, the languishment, the love:
    And blest those sonnets, sources of my fame;
    And blest that thought--Oh! never to remove!
    Which turns to her alone, from her alone which came.

    WRANGHAM.


      Blest be the year, the month, the hour, the day,
    The season and the time, and point of space,
    And blest the beauteous country and the place
    Where first of two bright eyes I felt the sway:
    Blest the sweet pain of which I was the prey,
    When newly doom'd Love's sovereign law to embrace,
    And blest the bow and shaft to which I trace,
    The wound that to my inmost heart found way:
    Blest be the ceaseless accents of my tongue,
    Unwearied breathing my loved lady's name:
    Blest my fond wishes, sighs, and tears, and pains:
    Blest be the lays in which her praise I sung,
    That on all sides acquired to her fair fame,
    And blest my thoughts! for o'er them all she reigns.

    DACRE.




SONNET XLVIII.

_Padre del ciel, dopo i perduti giorni._

CONSCIOUS OF HIS FOLLY, HE PRAYS GOD TO TURN HIM TO A BETTER LIFE.


      Father of heaven! after the days misspent,
    After the nights of wild tumultuous thought,
    In that fierce passion's strong entanglement,
    One, for my peace too lovely fair, had wrought;
    Vouchsafe that, by thy grace, my spirit bent
    On nobler aims, to holier ways be brought;
    That so my foe, spreading with dark intent
    His mortal snares, be foil'd, and held at nought.
    E'en now th' eleventh year its course fulfils,
    That I have bow'd me to the tyranny
    Relentless most to fealty most tried.
    Have mercy, Lord! on my unworthy ills:
    Fix all my thoughts in contemplation high;
    How on the cross this day a Saviour died.

    DACRE.


      Father of heaven! despite my days all lost,
    Despite my nights in doting folly spent
    With that fierce passion which my bosom rent
    At sight of her, too lovely for my cost;
    Vouchsafe at length that, by thy grace, I turn
    To wiser life, and enterprise more fair,
    So that my cruel foe, in vain his snare
    Set for my soul, may his defeat discern.
    Already, Lord, the eleventh year circling wanes
    Since first beneath his tyrant yoke I fell
    Who still is fiercest where we least rebel:
    Pity my undeserved and lingering pains,
    To holier thoughts my wandering sense restore,
    How on this day his cross thy Son our Saviour bore.

    MACGREGOR.




BALLATA V.

_Volgendo gli occhi al mio novo colore._

HER KIND SALUTE SAVED HIM FROM DEATH.


      Late as those eyes on my sunk cheek inclined,
    Whose paleness to the world seems of the grave,
    Compassion moved you to that greeting kind,
    Whose soft smile to my worn heart spirit gave.
    The poor frail life which yet to me is left
    Was of your beauteous eyes the liberal gift,
    And of that voice angelical and mild;
    My present state derived from them I see;
    As the rod quickens the slow sullen child,
    So waken'd they the sleeping soul in me.
    Thus, Lady, of my true heart both the keys
    You hold in hand, and yet your captive please:
    Ready to sail wherever winds may blow,
    By me most prized whate'er to you I owe.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET XLIX.

_Se voi poteste per turbati segni._

HE ENTREATS LAURA NOT TO HATE THE HEART FROM WHICH SHE CAN NEVER BE
ABSENT.


      If, but by angry and disdainful sign,
    By the averted head and downcast sight,
    By readiness beyond thy sex for flight,
    Deaf to all pure and worthy prayers of mine,
    Thou canst, by these or other arts of thine,
    'Scape from my breast--where Love on slip so slight
    Grafts every day new boughs--of such despite
    A fitting cause I then might well divine:
    For gentle plant in arid soil to be
    Seems little suited: so it better were,
    And this e'en nature dictates, thence to stir.
    But since thy destiny prohibits thee
    Elsewhere to dwell, be this at least thy care
    Not always to sojourn in hatred there.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET L.

_Lasso, che mal accorto fui da prima._

HE PRAYS LOVE TO KINDLE ALSO IN HER THE FLAME BY WHICH HE IS UNCEASINGLY
TORMENTED.


      Alas! this heart by me was little known
    In those first days when Love its depths explored,
    Where by degrees he made himself the lord
    Of my whole life, and claim'd it as his own:
    I did not think that, through his power alone,
    A heart time-steel'd, and so with valour stored,
    Such proof of failing firmness could afford,
    And fell by wrong self-confidence o'erthrown.
    Henceforward all defence too late will come,
    Save this, to prove, enough or little, here
    If to these mortal prayers Love lend his ear.
    Not now my prayer--nor can such e'er have room--
    That with more mercy he consume my heart,
    But in the fire that she may bear her part.

    MACGREGOR.




SESTINA III.

_L' aere gravato, e l' importuna nebbia._

HE COMPARES LAURA TO WINTER, AND FORESEES THAT SHE WILL ALWAYS BE THE
SAME.


      The overcharged air, the impending cloud,
    Compress'd together by impetuous winds,
    Must presently discharge themselves in rain;
    Already as of crystal are the streams,
    And, for the fine grass late that clothed the vales,
    Is nothing now but the hoar frost and ice.

    And I, within my heart, more cold than ice,
    Of heavy thoughts have such a hovering cloud,
    As sometimes rears itself in these our vales,
    Lowly, and landlock'd against amorous winds,
    Environ'd everywhere with stagnant streams,
    When falls from soft'ning heaven the smaller rain.

    Lasts but a brief while every heavy rain;
    And summer melts away the snows and ice,
    When proudly roll th' accumulated streams:
    Nor ever hid the heavens so thick a cloud,
    Which, overtaken by the furious winds,
    Fled not from the first hills and quiet vales.

    But ah! what profit me the flowering vales?
    Alike I mourn in sunshine and in rain,
    Suffering the same in warm and wintry winds;
    For only then my lady shall want ice
    At heart, and on her brow th' accustom'd cloud,
    When dry shall be the seas, the lakes, and streams.

    While to the sea descend the mountain streams,
    As long as wild beasts love umbrageous vales,
    O'er those bright eyes shall hang th' unfriendly cloud
    My own that moistens with continual rain;
    And in that lovely breast be harden'd ice
    Which forces still from mine so dolorous winds.

    Yet well ought I to pardon all the winds
    But for the love of one, that 'mid two streams
    Shut me among bright verdure and pure ice;
    So that I pictured then in thousand vales
    The shade wherein I was, which heat or rain
    Esteemeth not, nor sound of broken cloud.

    But fled not ever cloud before the winds,
    As I that day: nor ever streams with rain
    Nor ice, when April's sun opens the vales.

    MACGREGOR.


[Illustration: CASTLE OF ST. ANGELO & ST. PETERS.]




SONNET LI.

_Del mar Tirreno alla sinistra riva._

THE FALL.


      Upon the left shore of the Tyrrhene sea,
    Where, broken by the winds, the waves complain,
    Sudden I saw that honour'd green again,
    Written for whom so many a page must be:
    Love, ever in my soul his flame who fed,
    Drew me with memories of those tresses fair;
    Whence, in a rivulet, which silent there
    Through long grass stole, I fell, as one struck dead.
    Lone as I was, 'mid hills of oak and fir,
    I felt ashamed; to heart of gentle mould
    Blushes suffice: nor needs it other spur.
    'Tis well at least, breaking bad customs old,
    To change from eyes to feet: from these so wet
    By those if milder April should be met.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET LII.

_L' aspetto sacro della terra vostra._

THE VIEW OF ROME PROMPTS HIM TO TEAR HIMSELF FROM LAURA, BUT LOVE WILL
NOT ALLOW HIM.


      The solemn aspect of this sacred shore
    Wakes for the misspent past my bitter sighs;
    'Pause, wretched man! and turn,' as conscience cries,
    Pointing the heavenward way where I should soar.
    But soon another thought gets mastery o'er
    The first, that so to palter were unwise;
    E'en now the time, if memory err not, flies,
    When we should wait our lady-love before.
    I, for his aim then well I apprehend,
    Within me freeze, as one who, sudden, hears
    News unexpected which his soul offend.
    Returns my first thought then, that disappears;
    Nor know I which shall conquer, but till now
    Within me they contend, nor hope of rest allow!

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET LIII.

_Ben sapev' io che natural consiglio._

FLEEING FROM LOVE, HE FALLS INTO THE HANDS OF HIS MINISTERS.


      Full well I know that natural wisdom nought,
    Love, 'gainst thy power, in any age prevail'd,
    For snares oft set, fond oaths that ever fail'd,
    Sore proofs of thy sharp talons long had taught;
    But lately, and in me it wonder wrought--
    With care this new experience be detail'd--
    'Tween Tuscany and Elba as I sail'd
    On the salt sea, it first my notice caught.
    I fled from thy broad hands, and, by the way,
    An unknown wanderer, 'neath the violence
    Of winds, and waves, and skies, I helpless lay,
    When, lo! thy ministers, I knew not whence,
    Who quickly made me by fresh stings to feel
    Ill who resists his fate, or would conceal.

    MACGREGOR.




CANZONE VII.

_Lasso me, ch i' non so in qual parte pieghi._

HE WOULD CONSOLE HIMSELF WITH SONG, BUT IS CONSTRAINED TO WEEP.


      Me wretched! for I know not whither tend
    The hopes which have so long my heart betray'd:
    If none there be who will compassion lend,
    Wherefore to Heaven these often prayers for aid?
    But if, belike, not yet denied to me
    That, ere my own life end,
    These sad notes mute shall be,
    Let not my Lord conceive the wish too free,
    Yet once, amid sweet flowers, to touch the string,
    "Reason and right it is that love I sing."

    Reason indeed there were at last that I
    Should sing, since I have sigh'd so long and late,
    But that for me 'tis vain such art to try,
    Brief pleasures balancing with sorrows great;
    Could I, by some sweet verse, but cause to shine
    Glad wonder and new joy
    Within those eyes divine,
    Bliss o'er all other lovers then were mine!
    But more, if frankly fondly I could say,
    "My lady asks, I therefore wake the lay."

    Delicious, dangerous thoughts! that, to begin
    A theme so high, have gently led me thus,
    You know I ne'er can hope to pass within
    Our lady's heart, so strongly steel'd from us;
    She will not deign to look on thing so low,
    Nor may our language win
    Aught of her care: since Heaven ordains it so,
    And vainly to oppose must irksome grow,
    Even as I my heart to stone would turn,
    "So in my verse would I be rude and stern."

    What do I say? where am I?--My own heart
    And its misplaced desires alone deceive!
    Though my view travel utmost heaven athwart
    No planet there condemns me thus to grieve:
    Why, if the body's veil obscure my sight,
    Blame to the stars impart.
    Or other things as bright?
    Within me reigns my tyrant, day and night,
    Since, for his triumph, me a captive took
    "Her lovely face, and lustrous eyes' dear look."

    While all things else in Nature's boundless reign
    Came good from the Eternal Master's mould,
    I look for such desert in me in vain:
    Me the light wounds that I around behold;
    To the true splendour if I turn at last,
    My eye would shrink in pain,
    Whose own fault o'er it cast
    Such film, and not the fatal day long past,
    When first her angel beauty met my view,
    "In the sweet season when my life was new."

    MACGREGOR.




CANZONE VIII.

_Perchè la vita è breve._

IN PRAISE OF LAURA'S EYES: THE DIFFICULTY OF HIS THEME.


      Since human life is frail,
    And genius trembles at the lofty theme,
    I little confidence in either place;
    But let my tender wail
    There, where it ought, deserved attention claim,
    That wail which e'en in silence we may trace.
    O beauteous eyes, where Love doth nestling stay!
    To you I turn my insufficient lay,
    Unapt to flow; but passion's goad I feel:
    And he of you who sings
    Such courteous habit by the strain is taught,
    That, borne on amorous wings,
    He soars above the reach of vulgar thought:
    Exalted thus, I venture to reveal
    What long my cautious heart has labour'd to conceal.

    Yes, well do I perceive
    To you how wrongful is my scanty praise;
    Yet the strong impulse cannot be withstood,
    That urges, since I view'd
    What fancy to the sight before ne'er gave,
    What ne'er before graced mine, or higher lays.
    Bright authors of my sadly-pleasing state,
    That you alone conceive me well I know,
    When to your fierce beams I become as snow!
    Your elegant disdain
    Haply then kindles at my worthless strain.
    Did not this dread create
    Some mitigation of my bosom's heat,
    Death would be bliss: for greater joy 'twould give
    With them to suffer death, without them than to live.

    If not consumèd quite,
    I the weak object of a flame so strong:
    'Tis not that safety springs from native might,
    But that some fear restrains,
    Which chills the current circling through my veins;
    Strengthening this heart, that it may suffer long.
    O hills, O vales, O forests, floods, and fields,
    Ye who have witness'd how my sad life flows,
    Oft have ye heard me call on death for aid.
    Ah, state surcharged with woes!
    To stay destroys, and flight no succour yields.
    But had not higher dread
    Withheld, some sudden effort I had made
    To end my sorrows and protracted pains,
    Of which the beauteous cause insensible remains.

    Why lead me, grief, astray
    From my first theme to chant a different lay?
    Let me proceed where pleasure may invite.
    'Tis not of you I 'plain,
    O eyes, beyond compare serenely bright;
    Nor yet of him who binds me in his chain.
    Ye clearly can behold the hues that Love
    Scatters ofttime on my dejected face;
    And fancy may his inward workings trace
    There where, whole nights and days,
    He rules with power derived from your bright rays:
    What rapture would ye prove,
    If you, dear lights, upon yourselves could gaze!
    But, frequent as you bend your beams on me,
    What influence you possess you in another see.

    Oh! if to you were known
    That beauty which I sing, immense, divine.
    As unto him on whom its glories shine!
    The heart had then o'erflown
    With joy unbounded, such as is denied
    Unto that nature which its acts doth guide.
    How happy is the soul for you that sighs,
    Celestial lights! which lend a charm to life,
    And make me bless what else I should not prize!
    Ah! why, so seldom why
    Afford what ne'er can cause satiety?
    More often to your sight
    Why not bring Love, who holds me constant strife?
    And why so soon of joys despoil me quite,
    Which ever and anon my tranced soul delight?

    Yes, 'debted to your grace,
    Frequent I feel throughout my inmost soul
    Unwonted floods of sweetest rapture roll;
    Relieving so the mind,
    That all oppressive thoughts are left behind,
    And of a thousand only one has place;
    For which alone this life is dear to me.
    Oh! might the blessing of duration prove,
    Not equall'd then could my condition be!
    But this would, haply, move
    In others envy, in myself vain pride.
    That pain should be allied
    To pleasure is, alas! decreed above;
    Then, stifling all the ardour of desire,
    Homeward I turn my thoughts, and in myself retire.

    So sweetly shines reveal'd
    The amorous thought within your soul which dwells,
    That other joys it from my heart expels:
    Hence I aspire to frame
    Lays whereon Hope may build a deathless name,
    When in the tomb my dust shall lie conceal'd.
    At your approach anguish and sorrow fly;
    These, as your beams retire, again draw nigh;
    Yet outward acts their influence ne'er betray,
    For doting memory
    Dwells on the past, and chases them away.
    Whatever, then, of worth
    My genius ripens owes to you its birth.
    To you all honour and all praise is due--
    Myself a barren soil, and cultured but by you.

    Thy strains, O song! appease me not, but fire,
    Chanting a theme that wings my wild desire:
    Trust me, thou shalt ere long a sister-song acquire.

    NOTT.


      Since mortal life is frail,
    And my mind shrinks from lofty themes deterr'd,
    But small the trust which I in either feel:
    Yet hope I that my wail,
    Which vainly I in silence would conceal,
    Shall, where I wish, where most it ought, be heard.
    Beautiful eyes! wherein Love makes his nest,
    To you my song its feeble descant turns,
    Slow of itself, but now by passion spurr'd;
    Who sings of you is blest,
    And from his theme such courteous habit learns
    That, borne on wings of love,
    Proudly he soars each viler thought above;
    Encouraged thus, what long my harass'd heart
    Has kept conceal'd, I venture to impart.

    Yet do I know full well
    How much my praise must wrongful prove to you,
    But how the great desire can I oppose,
    Which ever in me grows,
    Since what surpasses thought 'twas mine to view,
    Though that nor others' wit nor mine can tell?
    Eyes! guilty authors of my cherish'd pain,
    That you alone can judge me, well I know,
    When from your burning beams I melt like snow,
    Haply your sweet disdain
    Offence in my unworthiness may see;
    Ah! were there not such fear,
    To calm the heat with which I kindle near,
    'Twere bliss to die: for better far to me
    Were death with them than life without could be.

    If yet not wasted quite--
    So frail a thing before so fierce a flame--
    'Tis not from my own strength that safety came,
    But that some fear gives might,
    Freezing the warm blood coursing through its veins,
    To my poor heart better to bear the strife.
    O valleys, hills, O forests, floods, and plains,
    Witnesses of my melancholy life!
    For death how often have ye heard me pray!
    Ah, miserable fate!
    Where flight avails not, though 'tis death to stay;
    But, if a dread more great
    Restrain'd me not, despair would find a way,
    Speedy and short, my lingering pains to close,
    --Hers then the crime who still no mercy shows.

    Why thus astray, O grief,
    Lead me to speak what I would leave unsaid?
    Leave me, where pleasure me impels, to tread:
    Not now my song complains
    Of you, sweet eyes, serene beyond belief,
    Nor yet of him who binds me in such chains:
    Right well may you observe the varying hues
    Which o'er my visage oft the tyrant strews,
    And thence may guess what war within he makes,
    Where night and day he reigns,
    Strong in the power which from your light he takes:
    Blessèd ye were as bright,
    Save that from you is barr'd your own dear sight:
    Yet often as to me those orbs you turn,
    What they to others are you well may learn.

    If, as to us who gaze
    Were known to you the charms incredible
    And heavenly, of which I sing the praise,
    No measured joy would swell
    Your heart, and haply, therefore, 'tis denied
    Unto the power which doth their motions guide.
    Happy the soul for you which breathes the sigh,
    Best lights of heaven! for whom I grateful bless
    This life, which has for me no other joy.
    Alas! so seldom why
    Give me what I can ne'er too much possess?
    Why not more often see
    The ceaseless havoc which love makes of me?
    And why that bliss so quickly from me steal,
    From time to time which my rapt senses feel?

    Yes, thanks, great thanks to you!
    From time to time I feel through all my soul
    A sweetness so unusual and new,
    That every marring care
    And gloomy vision thence begins to roll,
    So that, from all, one only thought is there.
    That--that alone consoles me life to bear:
    And could but this my joy endure awhile,
    Nought earthly could, methinks, then match my state.
    Yet such great honour might
    Envy in others, pride in me excite:
    Thus still it seems the fate
    Of man, that tears should chase his transient smile:
    And, checking thus my burning wishes, I
    Back to myself return, to muse and sigh.

    The amorous anxious thought,
    Which reigns within you, flashes so on me,
    That from my heart it draws all other joy;
    Whence works and words so wrought
    Find scope and issue, that I hope to be
    Immortal made, although all flesh must die.
    At your approach ennui and anguish fly;
    With your departure they return again:
    But memory, on the past which doting dwells,
    Denies them entrance then,
    So that no outward act their influence tells;
    Thus, if in me is nurst
    Any good fruit, from you the seed came first:
    To you, if such appear, the praise is due,
    Barren myself till fertilized by you.

    Thy strains appease me not, O song!
    But rather fire me still that theme to sing
    Where centre all my thoughts--therefore, ere long,
    A sister ode to join thee will I bring.

    MACGREGOR.




CANZONE IX.

_Gentil mia donna, i' veggio._

IN PRAISE OF LAURA'S EYES: THEY LEAD HIM TO CONTEMPLATE THE PATH OF
LIFE.


      Lady, in your bright eyes
    Soft glancing round, I mark a holy light,
    Pointing the arduous way that heavenward lies;
    And to my practised sight,
    From thence, where Love enthroned, asserts his might,
    Visibly, palpably, the soul beams forth.
    This is the beacon guides to deeds of worth,
    And urges me to seek the glorious goal;
    This bids me leave behind the vulgar throng,
    Nor can the human tongue
    Tell how those orbs divine o'er all my soul
    Exert their sweet control,
    Both when hoar winter's frosts around are flung,
    And when the year puts on his youth again,
    Jocund, as when this bosom first knew pain.

    Oh! if in that high sphere,
    From whence the Eternal Ruler of the stars
    In this excelling work declared his might,
    All be as fair and bright,
    Loose me from forth my darksome prison here,
    That to so glorious life the passage bars;
    Then, in the wonted tumult of my breast,
    I hail boon Nature, and the genial day
    That gave me being, and a fate so blest,
    And her who bade hope beam
    Upon my soul; for till then burthensome
    Was life itself become:
    But now, elate with touch of self-esteem,
    High thoughts and sweet within that heart arise,
    Of which the warders are those beauteous eyes.

    No joy so exquisite
    Did Love or fickle Fortune ere devise,
    In partial mood, for favour'd votaries,
    But I would barter it
    For one dear glance of those angelic eyes,
    Whence springs my peace as from its living root.
    O vivid lustre! of power absolute
    O'er all my being--source of that delight,
    By which consumed I sink, a willing prey.
    As fades each lesser ray
    Before your splendour more intense and bright,
    So to my raptured heart,
    When your surpassing sweetness you impart,
    No other thought of feeling may remain
    Where you, with Love himself, despotic reign.

    All sweet emotions e'er
    By happy lovers felt in every clime,
    Together all, may not with mine compare,
    When, as from time to time,
    I catch from that dark radiance rich and deep
    A ray in which, disporting, Love is seen;
    And I believe that from my cradled sleep,
    By Heaven provided this resource hath been,
    'Gainst adverse fortune, and my nature frail.
    Wrong'd am I by that veil,
    And the fair hand which oft the light eclipse,
    That all my bliss hath wrought;
    And whence the passion struggling on my lips,
    Both day and night, to vent the breast o'erfraught,
    Still varying as I read her varying thought.

    For that (with pain I find)
    Not Nature's poor endowments may alone
    Render me worthy of a look so kind,
    I strive to raise my mind
    To match with the exalted hopes I own,
    And fires, though all engrossing, pure as mine.
    If prone to good, averse to all things base,
    Contemner of what worldlings covet most,
    I may become by long self-discipline.
    Haply this humble boast
    May win me in her fair esteem a place;
    For sure the end and aim
    Of all my tears, my sorrowing heart's sole claim,
    Were the soft trembling of relenting eyes,
    The generous lover's last, best, dearest prize.

    My lay, thy sister-song is gone before.
    And now another in my teeming brain
    Prepares itself: whence I resume the strain.

    DACRE.




CANZONE X.

_Poichè per mio destino._

IN PRAISE OF LAURA'S EYES: IN THEM HE FINDS EVERY GOOD, AND HE CAN NEVER
CEASE TO PRAISE THEM.


      Since then by destiny
    I am compell'd to sing the strong desire,
    Which here condemns me ceaselessly to sigh,
    May Love, whose quenchless fire
    Excites me, be my guide and point the way,
    And in the sweet task modulate my lay:
    But gently be it, lest th' o'erpowering theme
    Inflame and sting me, lest my fond heart may
    Dissolve in too much softness, which I deem,
    From its sad state, may be:
    For in me--hence my terror and distress!
    Not now as erst I see
    Judgment to keep my mind's great passion less:
    Nay, rather from mine own thoughts melt I so,
    As melts before the summer sun the snow.

    At first I fondly thought
    Communing with mine ardent flame to win
    Some brief repose, some time of truce within:
    This was the hope which brought
    Me courage what I suffer'd to explain,
    Now, now it leaves me martyr to my pain:
    But still, continuing mine amorous song,
    Must I the lofty enterprise maintain;
    So powerful is the wish that in me glows,
    That Reason, which so long
    Restrain'd it, now no longer can oppose.
    Then teach me, Love, to sing
    In such frank guise, that ever if the ear
    Of my sweet foe should chance the notes to hear,
    Pity, I ask no more, may in her spring.

    If, as in other times,
    When kindled to true virtue was mankind,
    The genius, energy of man could find
    Entrance in divers climes,
    Mountains and seas o'erpassing, seeking there
    Honour, and culling oft its garland fair,
    Mine were such wish, not mine such need would be.
    From shore to shore my weary course to trace,
    Since God, and Love, and Nature deign for me
    Each virtue and each grace
    In those dear eyes where I rejoice to place.
    In life to them must I
    Turn as to founts whence peace and safety swell:
    And e'en were death, which else I fear not, nigh,
    Their sight alone would teach me to be well.

    As, vex'd by the fierce wind,
    The weary sailor lifts at night his gaze
    To the twin lights which still our pole displays,
    So, in the storms unkind
    Of Love which I sustain, in those bright eyes
    My guiding light and only solace lies:
    But e'en in this far more is due to theft,
    Which, taught by Love, from time to time, I make
    Of secret glances than their gracious gift:
    Yet that, though rare and slight,
    Makes me from them perpetual model take;
    Since first they blest my sight
    Nothing of good without them have I tried,
    Placing them over me to guard and guide,
    Because mine own worth held itself but light.

    Never the full effect
    Can I imagine, and describe it less
    Which o'er my heart those soft eyes still possess!
    As worthless I reject
    And mean all other joys that life confers,
    E'en as all other beauties yield to hers.
    A tranquil peace, alloy'd by no distress,
    Such as in heaven eternally abides,
    Moves from their lovely and bewitching smile.
    So could I gaze, the while
    Love, at his sweet will, governs them and guides,
    --E'en though the sun were nigh,
    Resting above us on his onward wheel--
    On her, intensely with undazzled eye,
    Nor of myself nor others think or feel.

    Ah! that I should desire
    Things that can never in this world be won,
    Living on wishes hopeless to acquire.
    Yet, were the knot undone,
    Wherewith my weak tongue Love is wont to bind,
    Checking its speech, when her sweet face puts on
    All its great charms, then would I courage find,
    Words on that point so apt and new to use,
    As should make weep whoe'er might hear the tale.
    But the old wounds I bear,
    Stamp'd on my tortured heart, such power refuse;
    Then grow I weak and pale,
    And my blood hides itself I know not where;
    Nor as I was remain I: hence I know
    Love dooms my death and this the fatal blow.

    Farewell, my song! already do I see
    Heavily in my hand the tired pen move
    From its long dear discourse with her I love;
    Not so my thoughts from communing with me.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET LIV.

_Io son già stanco di pensar siccome._

HE WONDERS AT HIS LONG ENDURANCE OF SUCH TOIL AND SUFFERING.


      I weary me alway with questions keen
    How, why my thoughts ne'er turn from you away,
    Wherefore in life they still prefer to stay,
    When they might flee this sad and painful scene,
    And how of the fine hair, the lovely mien,
    Of the bright eyes which all my feelings sway,
    Calling on your dear name by night and day,
    My tongue ne'er silent in their praise has been,
    And how my feet not tender are, nor tired,
    Pursuing still with many a useless pace
    Of your fair footsteps the elastic trace;
    And whence the ink, the paper whence acquired,
    Fill'd with your memories: if in this I err,
    Not art's defect but Love's own fault it were.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET LV.

_I begli occhi, ond' i' fui percosso in guisa._

HE IS NEVER WEARY OF PRAISING THE EYES OF LAURA.


      The bright eyes which so struck my fenceless side
    That they alone which harm'd can heal the smart
    Beyond or power of herbs or magic art,
    Or stone which oceans from our shores divide,
    The chance of other love have so denied
    That one sweet thought alone contents my heart,
    From following which if ne'er my tongue depart,
    Pity the guided though you blame the guide.
    These are the bright eyes which, in every land
    But most in its own shrine, my heart, adored,
    Have spread the triumphs of my conquering lord;
    These are the same bright eyes which ever stand
    Burning within me, e'en as vestal fires,
    In singing which my fancy never tires.

    MACGREGOR.


      Not all the spells of the magician's art,
    Not potent herbs, nor travel o'er the main,
    But those sweet eyes alone can soothe my pain,
    And they which struck the blow must heal the smart;
    Those eyes from meaner love have kept my heart,
    Content one single image to retain,
    And censure but the medium wild and vain,
    If ill my words their honey'd sense impart;
    These are those beauteous eyes which never fail
    To prove Love's conquest, wheresoe'er they shine,
    Although my breast hath oftenest felt their fire;
    These are those beauteous eyes which still assail
    And penetrate my soul with sparks divine,
    So that of singing them I cannot tire.

    WROTTESLEY.




SONNET LVI.

_Amor con sue promesse lusingando._

LOVE CHAINS ARE STILL DEAR TO HIM.


      By promise fair and artful flattery
    Me Love contrived in prison old to snare,
    And gave the keys to her my foe in care,
    Who in self-exile dooms me still to lie.
    Alas! his wiles I knew not until I
    Was in their power, so sharp yet sweet to bear,
    (Man scarce will credit it although I swear)
    That I regain my freedom with a sigh,
    And, as true suffering captives ever do,
    Carry of my sore chains the greater part,
    And on my brow and eyes so writ my heart
    That when she witnesseth my cheek's wan hue
    A sigh shall own: if right I read his face,
    Between him and his tomb but small the space!

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET LVII.

_Per mirar Policleto a prova fiso._

ON THE PORTRAIT OF LAURA PAINTED BY SIMON MEMMI.


      Had Policletus seen her, or the rest
    Who, in past time, won honour in this art,
    A thousand years had but the meaner part
    Shown of the beauty which o'ercame my breast.
    But Simon sure, in Paradise the blest,
    Whence came this noble lady of my heart,
    Saw her, and took this wond'rous counterpart
    Which should on earth her lovely face attest.
    The work, indeed, was one, in heaven alone
    To be conceived, not wrought by fellow-men,
    Over whose souls the body's veil is thrown:
    'Twas done of grace: and fail'd his pencil when
    To earth he turn'd our cold and heat to bear,
    And felt that his own eyes but mortal were.

    MACGREGOR.


      Had Polycletus in proud rivalry
    On her his model gazed a thousand years,
    Not half the beauty to my soul appears,
    In fatal conquest, e'er could he descry.
    But, Simon, thou wast then in heaven's blest sky,
    Ere she, my fair one, left her native spheres,
    To trace a loveliness this world reveres
    Was thus thy task, from heaven's reality.
    Yes--thine the portrait heaven alone could wake,
    This clime, nor earth, such beauty could conceive,
    Where droops the spirit 'neath its earthly shrine:
    The soul's reflected grace was thine to take,
    Which not on earth thy painting could achieve,
    Where mortal limits all the powers confine.

    WOLLASTON.




SONNET LVIII.

_Quando giunse a Simon l' alto concetto._

HE DESIRES ONLY THAT MEMMI HAD BEEN ABLE TO IMPART SPEECH TO HIS
PORTRAIT OF LAURA.


      When, at my word, the high thought fired his mind,
    Within that master-hand which placed the pen,
    Had but the painter, in his fair work, then
    Language and intellect to beauty join'd,
    Less 'neath its care my spirit since had pined,
    Which worthless held what still pleased other men;
    And yet so mild she seems that my fond ken
    Of peace sees promise in that aspect kind.
    When further communing I hold with her
    Benignantly she smiles, as if she heard
    And well could answer to mine every word:
    But far o'er mine thy pride and pleasure were,
    Bright, warm and young, Pygmalion, to have press'd
    Thine image long and oft, while mine not once has blest.

    MACGREGOR.


      When Simon at my wish the proud design
    Conceived, which in his hand the pencil placed,
    Had he, while loveliness his picture graced,
    But added speech and mind to charms divine;
    What sighs he then had spared this breast of mine:
    That bliss had given to higher bliss distaste:
    For, when such meekness in her look was traced,
    'Twould seem she soon to kindness might incline.
    But, urging converse with the portray'd fair,
    Methinks she deigns attention to my prayer,
    Though wanting to reply the power of voice.
    What praise thyself, Pygmalion, hast thou gain'd;
    Forming that image, whence thou hast obtain'd
    A thousand times what, once obtain'd, would me rejoice.

    NOTT.




SONNET LIX.

_Se al principio risponde il fine e 'l mezzo._

IF HIS PASSION STILL INCREASE, HE MUST SOON DIE.


      If, of this fourteenth year wherein I sigh,
    The end and middle with its opening vie,
    Nor air nor shade can give me now release,
    I feel mine ardent passion so increase:
    For Love, with whom my thought no medium knows,
    Beneath whose yoke I never find repose,
    So rules me through these eyes, on mine own ill
    Too often turn'd, but half remains to kill.
    Thus, day by day, I feel me sink apace,
    And yet so secretly none else may trace,
    Save she whose glances my fond bosom tear.
    Scarcely till now this load of life I bear
    Nor know how long with me will be her stay,
    For death draws near, and hastens life away.

    MACGREGOR.




SESTINA IV.

_Chi è fermato di menar sua vita._

HE PRAYS GOD TO GUIDE HIS FRAIL BARK TO A SAFE PORT.


      Who is resolved to venture his vain life
    On the deceitful wave and 'mid the rocks,
    Alone, unfearing death, in little bark,
    Can never be far distant from his end:
    Therefore betimes he should return to port
    While to the helm yet answers his true sail.

    The gentle breezes to which helm and sail
    I trusted, entering on this amorous life,
    And hoping soon to make some better port,
    Have led me since amid a thousand rocks,
    And the sure causes of my mournful end
    Are not alone without, but in my bark.

    Long cabin'd and confined in this blind bark,
    I wander'd, looking never at the sail,
    Which, prematurely, bore me to my end;
    Till He was pleased who brought me into life
    So far to call me back from those sharp rocks,
    That, distantly, at last was seen my port.

    As lights at midnight seen in any port,
    Sometimes from the main sea by passing bark,
    Save when their ray is lost 'mid storms or rocks;
    So I too from above the swollen sail
    Saw the sure colours of that other life,
    And could not help but sigh to reach my end.

    Not that I yet am certain of that end,
    For wishing with the dawn to be in port,
    Is a long voyage for so short a life:
    And then I fear to find me in frail bark,
    Beyond my wishes full its every sail
    With the strong wind which drove me on those rocks.

    Escape I living from these doubtful rocks,
    Or if my exile have but a fair end,
    How happy shall I be to furl my sail,
    And my last anchor cast in some sure port;
    But, ah! I burn, and, as some blazing bark,
    So hard to me to leave my wonted life.

    Lord of my end and master of my life,
    Before I lose my bark amid the rocks,
    Direct to a good port its harass'd sail!

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET LX.

_Io son sì stanco sotto 'l fascio antico._

HE CONFESSES HIS ERRORS, AND THROWS HIMSELF ON THE MERCY OF GOD.


      Evil by custom, as by nature frail,
    I am so wearied with the long disgrace,
    That much I dread my fainting in the race
    Should let th' original enemy prevail.
    Once an Eternal Friend, that heard my cries,
    Came to my rescue, glorious in his might,
    Arm'd with all-conquering love, then took his flight,
    That I in vain pursued Him with my eyes.
    But his dear words, yet sounding, sweetly say,
    "O ye that faint with travel, see the way!
    Hopeless of other refuge, come to me."
    What grace, what kindness, or what destiny
    Will give me wings, as the fair-feather'd dove,
    To raise me hence and seek my rest above?

    BASIL KENNET.


      So weary am I 'neath the constant thrall
    Of mine own vile heart, and the false world's taint,
    That much I fear while on the way to faint,
    And in the hands of my worst foe to fall.
    Well came, ineffably, supremely kind,
    A friend to free me from the guilty bond,
    But too soon upward flew my sight beyond,
    So that in vain I strive his track to find;
    But still his words stamp'd on my heart remain,
    All ye who labour, lo! the way in me;
    Come unto me, nor let the world detain!
    Oh! that to me, by grace divine, were given
    Wings like a dove, then I away would flee,
    And be at rest, up, up from earth to heaven!

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET LXI.

_Io non fu' d' amar voi lassato unquanco._

UNLESS LAURA RELENT, HE IS RESOLVED TO ABANDON HER.


      Yet was I never of your love aggrieved,
    Nor never shall while that my life doth last:
    But of hating myself, that date is past;
    And tears continual sore have me wearied:
    I will not yet in my grave be buried;
    Nor on my tomb your name have fixèd fast,
    As cruel cause, that did the spirit soon haste
    From the unhappy bones, by great sighs stirr'd.
    Then if a heart of amorous faith and will
    Content your mind withouten doing grief;
    Please it you so to this to do relief:
    If otherwise you seek for to fulfil
    Your wrath, you err, and shall not as you ween;
    And you yourself the cause thereof have been.

    WYATT.


      Weary I never was, nor can be e'er,
    Lady, while life shall last, of loving you,
    But brought, alas! myself in hate to view,
    Perpetual tears have bred a blank despair:
    I wish a tomb, whose marble fine and fair,
    When this tired spirit and frail flesh are two,
    May show your name, to which my death is due,
    If e'en our names at last one stone may share;
    Wherefore, if full of faith and love, a heart
    Can, of worst torture short, suffice your hate,
    Mercy at length may visit e'en my smart.
    If otherwise your wrath itself would sate,
    It is deceived: and none will credit show;
    To Love and to myself my thanks for this I owe.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET LXII.

_Se bianche non son prima ambe le tempie._

THOUGH NOT SECURE AGAINST THE WILES OF LOVE, HE FEELS STRENGTH ENOUGH TO
RESIST THEM.


      Till silver'd o'er by age my temples grow,
    Where Time by slow degrees now plants his grey,
    Safe shall I never be, in danger's way
    While Love still points and plies his fatal bow
    I fear no more his tortures and his tricks,
    That he will keep me further to ensnare
    Nor ope my heart, that, from without, he there
    His poisonous and ruthless shafts may fix.
    No tears can now find issue from mine eyes,
    But the way there so well they know to win,
    That nothing now the pass to them denies.
    Though the fierce ray rekindle me within,
    It burns not all: her cruel and severe
    Form may disturb, not break my slumbers here.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET LXIII.

_Occhi, piangete; accompagnate il core._

DIALOGUE BETWEEN THE POET AND HIS EYES.


      Playne ye, myne eyes, accompanye my harte,
    For, by your fault, lo, here is death at hand!
    Ye brought hym first into this bitter band,
    And of his harme as yett ye felt no part;
    But now ye shall: Lo! here beginnes your smart.
    Wett shall you be, ye shall it not withstand
    With weepinge teares that shall make dymm your sight,
    And mystic clowdes shall hang still in your light.
    Blame but yourselves that kyndlyd have this brand,
    With suche desyre to strayne that past your might;
    But, since by you the hart hath caught his harme,
    His flamèd heat shall sometyme make you warme.

    HARRINGTON.


    _P._   Weep, wretched eyes, accompany the heart
         Which only from your weakness death sustains.
    _E._ Weep? evermore we weep; with keener pains
         For others' error than our own we smart.
    _P._ Love, entering first through you an easy part,
         Took up his seat, where now supreme he reigns.
    _E._ We oped to him the way, but Hope the veins
         First fired of him now stricken by death's dart.
    _P._ The lots, as seems to you, scarce equal fall
         'Tween heart and eyes, for you, at first sight, were
         Enamour'd of your common ill and shame.
    _E._ This is the thought which grieves us most of all;
         For perfect judgments are on earth so rare
         That one man's fault is oft another's blame.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET LXIV.

_Io amai sempre, ed amo forte ancora._

HE LOVES, AND WILL ALWAYS LOVE, THE SPOT AND THE HOUR IN WHICH HE FIRST
BECAME ENAMOURED OF LAURA.


    I always loved, I love sincerely yet,
    And to love more from day to day shall learn,
    The charming spot where oft in grief I turn
    When Love's severities my bosom fret:
    My mind to love the time and hour is set
    Which taught it each low care aside to spurn;
    She too, of loveliest face, for whom I burn
    Bids me her fair life love and sin forget.
    Who ever thought to see in friendship join'd,
    On all sides with my suffering heart to cope,
    The gentle enemies I love so well?
    Love now is paramount my heart to bind,
    And, save that with desire increases hope,
    Dead should I lie alive where I would dwell.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET LXV.

_Io avrò sempre in odio la fenestra._

BETTER IS IT TO DIE HAPPY THAN TO LIVE IN PAIN.


      Always in hate the window shall I bear,
    Whence Love has shot on me his shafts at will,
    Because not one of them sufficed to kill:
    For death is good when life is bright and fair,
    But in this earthly jail its term to outwear
    Is cause to me, alas! of infinite ill;
    And mine is worse because immortal still,
    Since from the heart the spirit may not tear.
    Wretched! ere this who surely ought'st to know
    By long experience, from his onward course
    None can stay Time by flattery or by force.
    Oft and again have I address'd it so:
    Mourner, away! he parteth not too soon
    Who leaves behind him far his life's calm June.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET LXVI.

_Sì tosto come avvien che l' arco scocchi._

HE CALLS THE EYES OF LAURA FOES, BECAUSE THEY KEEP HIM IN LIFE ONLY TO
TORMENT HIM.


      Instantly a good archer draws his bow
    Small skill it needs, e'en from afar, to see
    Which shaft, less fortunate, despised may be,
    Which to its destined sign will certain go:
    Lady, e'en thus of your bright eyes the blow,
    You surely felt pass straight and deep in me,
    Searching my life, whence--such is fate's decree--
    Eternal tears my stricken heart overflow;
    And well I know e'en then your pity said:
    Fond wretch! to misery whom passion leads,
    Be this the point at once to strike him dead.
    But seeing now how sorrow sorrow breeds,
    All that my cruel foes against me plot,
    For my worse pain, and for my death is not.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET LXVII.

_Poi che mia speme è lunga a venir troppo._

HE COUNSELS LOVERS TO FLEE, RATHER THAN BE CONSUMED BY THE FLAMES OF
LOVE.


      Since my hope's fruit yet faileth to arrive,
    And short the space vouchsafed me to survive,
    Betimes of this aware I fain would be,
    Swifter than light or wind from Love to flee:
    And I do flee him, weak albeit and lame
    O' my left side, where passion racked my frame.
    Though now secure yet bear I on my face
    Of the amorous encounter signal trace.
    Wherefore I counsel each this way who comes,
    Turn hence your footsteps, and, if Love consumes,
    Think not in present pain his worst is done;
    For, though I live, of thousand scapes not one!
    'Gainst Love my enemy was strong indeed--
    Lo! from his wounds e'en she is doom'd to bleed.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET LXVIII.

_Fuggendo la prigione ov' Amor m' ebbe._

HE LONGS TO RETURN TO THE CAPTIVITY OF LOVE.


      Fleeing the prison which had long detain'd,
    Where Love dealt with me as to him seem'd well,
    Ladies, the time were long indeed to tell,
    How much my heart its new-found freedom pain'd.
    I felt within I could not, so bereaved,
    Live e'en a day: and, midway, on my eyes
    That traitor rose in so complete disguise,
    A wiser than myself had been deceived:
    Whence oft I've said, deep sighing for the past,
    Alas! the yoke and chains of old to me
    Were sweeter far than thus released to be.
    Me wretched! but to learn mine ill at last;
    With what sore trial must I now forget
    Errors that round my path myself have set.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET LXIX.

_Erano i capei d' oro all' aura sparsi._

HE PAINTS THE BEAUTIES OF LAURA, PROTESTING HIS UNALTERABLE LOVE.


      Loose to the breeze her golden tresses flow'd
    Wildly in thousand mazy ringlets blown,
    And from her eyes unconquer'd glances shone,
    Those glances now so sparingly bestow'd.
    And true or false, meseem'd some signs she show'd
    As o'er her cheek soft pity's hue was thrown;
    I, whose whole breast with love's soft food was sown,
    What wonder if at once my bosom glow'd?
    Graceful she moved, with more than mortal mien,
    In form an angel: and her accents won
    Upon the ear with more than human sound.
    A spirit heavenly pure, a living sun,
    Was what I saw; and if no more 'twere seen,
    T' unbend the bow will never heal the wound.

    ANON., OX., 1795.


      Her golden tresses on the wind she threw,
    Which twisted them in many a beauteous braid;
    In her fine eyes the burning glances play'd,
    With lovely light, which now they seldom show:
    Ah! then it seem'd her face wore pity's hue,
    Yet haply fancy my fond sense betray'd;
    Nor strange that I, in whose warm heart was laid
    Love's fuel, suddenly enkindled grew!
    Not like a mortal's did her step appear,
    Angelic was her form; her voice, methought,
    Pour'd more than human accents on the ear.
    A living sun was what my vision caught,
    A spirit pure; and though not such still found,
    Unbending of the bow ne'er heals the wound.

    NOTT.


      Her golden tresses to the gale were streaming,
    That in a thousand knots did them entwine,
    And the sweet rays which now so rarely shine
    From her enchanting eyes, were brightly beaming,
    And--was it fancy?--o'er that dear face gleaming
    Methought I saw Compassion's tint divine;
    What marvel that this ardent heart of mine
    Blazed swiftly forth, impatient of Love's dreaming?
    There was nought mortal in her stately tread
    But grace angelic, and her speech awoke
    Than human voices a far loftier sound,
    A spirit of heaven,--a living sun she broke
    Upon my sight;--what if these charms be fled?--
    The slackening of the bow heals not the wound.

    WROTTESLEY.




SONNET LXX.

_La bella donna che cotanto amavi._

TO HIS BROTHER GERARDO, ON THE DEATH OF A LADY TO WHOM HE WAS ATTACHED.


      The beauteous lady thou didst love so well
    Too soon hath from our regions wing'd her flight,
    To find, I ween, a home 'mid realms of light;
    So much in virtue did she here excel
    Thy heart's twin key of joy and woe can dwell
    No more with her--then re-assume thy might,
    Pursue her by the path most swift and right,
    Nor let aught earthly stay thee by its spell.
    Thus from thy heaviest burthen being freed,
    Each other thou canst easier dispel,
    And an unfreighted pilgrim seek thy sky;
    Too well, thou seest, how much the soul hath need,
    (Ere yet it tempt the shadowy vale) to quell
    Each earthly hope, since all that lives must die.

    WOLLASTON.


      The lovely lady who was long so dear
    To thee, now suddenly is from us gone,
    And, for this hope is sure, to heaven is flown,
    So mild and angel-like her life was here!
    Now from her thraldom since thy heart is clear,
    Whose either key she, living, held alone,
    Follow where she the safe short way has shown,
    Nor let aught earthly longer interfere.
    Thus disencumber'd from the heavier weight,
    The lesser may aside be easier laid,
    And the freed pilgrim win the crystal gate;
    So teaching us, since all things that are made
    Hasten to death, how light must be his soul
    Who treads the perilous pass, unscathed and whole!

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET LXXI.

_Piangete, donne, e con voi pianga Amore._

ON THE DEATH OF CINO DA PISTOIA.


      Weep, beauteous damsels, and let Cupid weep,
    Of every region weep, ye lover train;
    He, who so skilfully attuned his strain
    To your fond cause, is sunk in death's cold sleep!
    Such limits let not my affliction keep,
    As may the solace of soft tears restrain;
    And, to relieve my bosom of its pain,
    Be all my sighs tumultuous, utter'd deep!
    Let song itself, and votaries of verse,
    Breathe mournful accents o'er our Cino's bier,
    Who late is gone to number with the blest!
    Oh! weep, Pistoia, weep your sons perverse;
    Its choicest habitant has fled our sphere,
    And heaven may glory in its welcome guest!

    NOTT.


      Ye damsels, pour your tears! weep with you. Love!
    Weep, all ye lovers, through the peopled sphere!
    Since he is dead who, while he linger'd here,
    With all his might to do you honour strove.
    For me, this tyrant grief my prayers shall move
    Not to contest the comfort of a tear,
    Nor check those sighs, that to my heart are dear,
    Since ease from them alone it hopes to prove.
    Ye verses, weep!--ye rhymes, your woes renew!
    For Cino, master of the love-fraught lay,
    E'en now is from our fond embraces torn!
    Pistoia, weep, and all your thankless crew!
    Your sweetest inmate now is reft away--
    But, heaven, rejoice, and hail your son new-born!

    CHARLEMONT.




SONNET LXXII.

_Più volte Amor m' avea già detto: scrivi._

HE WRITES WHAT LOVE BIDS HIM.


      White--to my heart Love oftentimes had said--
    Write what thou seest in letters large of gold,
    That livid are my votaries to behold,
    And in a moment made alive and dead.
    Once in thy heart my sovran influence spread
    A public precedent to lovers told;
    Though other duties drew thee from my fold,
    I soon reclaim'd thee as thy footsteps fled.
    And if the bright eyes which I show'd thee first,
    If the fair face where most I loved to stay,
    Thy young heart's icy hardness when I burst,
    Restore to me the bow which all obey,
    Then may thy cheek, which now so smooth appears,
    Be channell'd with my daily drink of tears.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET LXXIII.

_Quando giugne per gli occhi al cor profondo._

HE DESCRIBES THE STATE OF TWO LOVERS, AND RETURNS IN THOUGHT TO HIS OWN
SUFFERINGS.


      When reaches through the eyes the conscious heart
    Its imaged fate, all other thoughts depart;
    The powers which from the soul their functions take
    A dead weight on the frame its limbs then make.
    From the first miracle a second springs,
    At times the banish'd faculty that brings,
    So fleeing from itself, to some new seat,
    Which feeds revenge and makes e'en exile sweet.
    Thus in both faces the pale tints were rife,
    Because the strength which gave the glow of life
    On neither side was where it wont to dwell--
    I on that day these things remember'd well,
    Of that fond couple when each varying mien
    Told me in like estate what long myself had been.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET LXXIV.

_Così potess' io ben chiuder in versi._

HE COMPLAINS THAT TO HIM ALONE IS FAITH HURTFUL.


      Could I, in melting verse, my thoughts but throw,
    As in my heart their living load I bear,
    No soul so cruel in the world was e'er
    That would not at the tale with pity glow.
    But ye, blest eyes, which dealt me the sore blow,
    'Gainst which nor helm nor shield avail'd to spare
    Within, without, behold me poor and bare,
    Though never in laments is breathed my woe.
    But since on me your bright glance ever shines,
    E'en as a sunbeam through transparent glass,
    Suffice then the desire without the lines.
    Faith Peter bless'd and Mary, but, alas!
    It proves an enemy to me alone,
    Whose spirit save by you to none is known.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET LXXV.

_Io son dell' aspectar omai sì vinto._

HAVING ONCE SURRENDERED HIMSELF, HE IS COMPELLED EVER TO ENDURE THE
PANGS OF LOVE.


      Weary with expectation's endless round,
    And overcome in this long war of sighs,
    I hold desires in hate and hopes despise,
    And every tie wherewith my breast is bound;
    But the bright face which in my heart profound
    Is stamp'd, and seen where'er I turn mine eyes,
    Compels me where, against my will, arise
    The same sharp pains that first my ruin crown'd.
    Then was my error when the old way quite
    Of liberty was bann'd and barr'd to me:
    He follows ill who pleases but his sight:
    To its own harm my soul ran wild and free,
    Now doom'd at others' will to wait and wend;
    Because that once it ventured to offend.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET LXXVI.

_Ahi bella libertà, come tu m' hai._

HE DEPLORES HIS LOST LIBERTY AND THE UNHAPPINESS OF HIS PRESENT STATE.


      Alas! fair Liberty, thus left by thee,
    Well hast thou taught my discontented heart
    To mourn the peace it felt, ere yet Love's dart
    Dealt me the wound which heal'd can never be;
    Mine eyes so charm'd with their own weakness grow
    That my dull mind of reason spurns the chain;
    All worldly occupation they disdain,
    Ah! that I should myself have train'd them so.
    Naught, save of her who is my death, mine ear
    Consents to learn; and from my tongue there flows
    No accent save the name to me so dear;
    Love to no other chase my spirit spurs,
    No other path my feet pursue; nor knows
    My hand to write in other praise but hers.

    MACGREGOR.


      Alas, sweet Liberty! in speeding hence,
    Too well didst thou reveal unto my heart
    Its careless joy, ere Love ensheathed his dart,
    Of whose dread wound I ne'er can lose the sense
    My eyes, enamour'd of their grief intense,
    Did in that hour from Reason's bridle start,
    Thus used to woe, they have no wish to part;
    Each other mortal work is an offence.
    No other theme will now my soul content
    Than she who plants my death, with whose blest name
    I make the air resound in echoes sweet:
    Love spurs me to her as his only bent,
    My hand can trace nought other but her fame,
    No other spot attracts my willing feet.

    WOLLASTON.




SONNET LXXVII.

_Orso, al vostro destrier si può ben porre._

HE SYMPATHISES WITH HIS FRIEND ORSO AT HIS INABILITY TO ATTEND A
TOURNAMENT.


      Orso, a curb upon thy gallant horse
    Well may we place to turn him from his course,
    But who thy heart may bind against its will
    Which honour courts and shuns dishonour still?
    Sigh not! for nought its praise away can take,
    Though Fate this journey hinder you to make.
    For, as already voiced by general fame,
    Now is it there, and none before it came.
    Amid the camp, upon the day design'd,
    Enough itself beneath those arms to find
    Which youth, love, valour, and near blood concern,
    Crying aloud: With noble fire I burn,
    As my good lord unwillingly at home,
    Who pines and languishes in vain to come.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET LXXVIII.

_Poi che voi ed io più volte abbiam provato._

TO A FRIEND, COUNSELLING HIM TO ABANDON EARTHLY PLEASURES.


      Still has it been our bitter lot to prove
    How hope, or e'er it reach fruition, flies!
    Up then to that high good, which never dies,
    Lift we the heart--to heaven's pure bliss above.
    On earth, as in a tempting mead, we rove,
    Where coil'd 'mid flowers the traitor serpent lies;
    And, if some casual glimpse delight our eyes,
    'Tis but to grieve the soul enthrall'd by Love.
    Oh! then, as thou wouldst wish ere life's last day
    To taste the sweets of calm unbroken rest,
    Tread firm the narrow, shun the beaten way--
    Ah! to thy friend too well may be address'd:
    "Thou show'st a path, thyself most apt to stray,
    Which late thy truant feet, fond youth, have never press'd."

    WRANGHAM.


      Friend, as we both in confidence complain
    To see our ill-placed hopes return in vain,
    Let that chief good which must for ever please
    Exalt our thought and fix our happiness.
    This world as some gay flowery field is spread,
    Which hides a serpent in its painted bed,
    And most it wounds when most it charms our eyes,
    At once the tempter and the paradise.
    And would you, then, sweet peace of mind restore,
    And in fair calm expect your parting hour,
    Leave the mad train, and court the happy few.
    Well may it be replied, "O friend, you show
    Others the path, from which so often you
    Have stray'd, and now stray farther than before."

    BASIL KENNET.




SONNET LXXIX.

_Quella fenestra, ove l' un sol si vede._

RECOLLECTIONS OF LOVE.


      That window where my sun is often seen
    Refulgent, and the world's at morning's hours;
    And that, where Boreas blows, when winter lowers,
    And the short days reveal a clouded scene;
    That bench of stone where, with a pensive mien,
    My Laura sits, forgetting beauty's powers;
    Haunts where her shadow strikes the walls or flowers,
    And her feet press the paths or herbage green:
    The place where Love assail'd me with success;
    And spring, the fatal time that, first observed,
    Revives the keen remembrance every year;
    With looks and words, that o'er me have preserved
    A power no length of time can render less,
    Call to my eyes the sadly-soothing tear.

    PENN.


      That window where my sun is ever seen,
    Dazzling and bright, and Nature's at the none;
    And that where still, when Boreas rude has blown
    In the short days, the air thrills cold and keen:
    The stone where, at high noon, her seat has been,
    Pensive and parleying with herself alone:
    Haunts where her bright form has its shadow thrown,
    Or trod her fairy foot the carpet green:
    The cruel spot where first Love spoil'd my rest,
    And the new season which, from year to year,
    Opes, on this day, the old wound in my breast:
    The seraph face, the sweet words, chaste and dear,
    Which in my suffering heart are deep impress'd,
    All melt my fond eyes to the frequent tear.

    MACGREGOR.




SONNET LXXX.

_Lasso! ben so che dolorose prede._

THOUGH FOR FOURTEEN YEARS HE HAS STRUGGLED UNSUCCESSFULLY, HE STILL
HOPES TO CONQUER HIS PASSION.


      Alas! well know I what sad havoc makes
    Death of our kind, how Fate no mortal spares!
    How soon the world whom once it loved forsakes,
    How short the faith it to the friendless bears!
    Much languishment, I see, small mercy wakes;
    For the last day though now my heart prepares,
    Love not a whit my cruel prison breaks,
    And still my cheek grief's wonted tribute wears.
    I mark the days, the moments, and the hours
    Bear the full years along, nor find deceit,
    Bow'd 'neath a greater force than magic spell.
    For fourteen years have fought with varying powers
    Desire and Reason: and the best shall beat;
    If mortal spirits here can good foretell.

    MACGREGOR.


      Alas! I know death makes us all his prey,
    Nor aught of mercy shows to destined man;
    How swift the world completes its circling span,
    And faithless Time soon speeds him on his way.
    My heart repeats the blast of earth's last day,
    Yet for its grief no recompense can scan,
    Love holds me still beneath its cruel ban,
    And still my eyes their usual tribute pay.
    My watchful senses mark how on their wing
    The circling years transport their fleeter kin,
    And still I bow enslaved as by a spell:
    For fourteen years did reason proudly fling
    Defiance at my tameless will, to win
    A triumph blest, if Man can good foretell.

    WOLLASTON.
